December 1, 2025, at 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Kevork Abazajian (UC Irvine)
Successes and challenges in neutrino cosmology and structure formation

Cosmology has delivered on the promise of high sensitivity to neutrino properties of their total mass and number, with mass measurements now at precisions more than an order of magnitude better than from the laboratory. Cosmic microwave background observations, large scale structure surveys, baryon acoustic oscillation measures, and Type Ia supernovae surveys all inform us of cosmological matter and energy content and measure the clustering of matter, and provide these constraints. I will give an overview of the physics of these sensitivities to neutrino properties in the standard picture, along with their model dependencies. Significant tensions exist in several key observations, including the local Hubble expansion rate. These have surprising implications for neutrinos. I will also discuss the apparent anomalous massive galaxies discovered by JWST and their consequences for structure formation.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/84975213690?pwd=LErSSSFj5F7bRm3F0Co5VKsOasbISr.1">Zoom</A>


November 24, 2025, at 15:30 in P8445B
Prof. Gopolang Mohlabeng (SFU)
Searching for light accelerated dark matter

Low mass accelerated dark matter (DM) is very well motivated and has been a subject of much attention in the literature. These fast-moving particles can gain enough kinetic energy to surpass the energy thresholds of some Large volume terrestrial detectors. For instance, fast-moving DM can deposit sizable amounts of energy at both large volume neutrino detectors and dark matter direct detection experiments. In this talk, I will focus on searches for both multi-component &quot;boosted&quot; DM and cosmic-ray accelerated DM. I will present recent work which explores these accelerated DM scenarios using a variety of probes.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/84975213690?pwd=LErSSSFj5F7bRm3F0Co5VKsOasbISr.1">Zoom</A>


November 17, 2025, at 14:30 in P8445B
Dr. Afif Omar (UVic)
Probing Hadronic Dark Matter Annihilation with Big Bang Nucleosynthesis

The first elements in the Universe were synthesized within a few minutes after the Big Bang, in the epoch known as Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN). Precise measurements from astrophysical observations, the cosmic microwave background (CMB), and nuclear reaction rates render BBN an essentially parameter-free theory, making it a powerful test of new physics. In this talk, I will show how BBN can be used to probe residual annihilations of sub-GeV thermal relic dark matter (DM). I will focus on candidates with velocity-suppressed annihilation channels and show that DM annihilation to pions and kaons beyond freeze-out, and their subsequent interaction with protons and neutrons prior to the deuterium bottleneck provide a sensitivity to annihilation that surpasses that of the CMB and indirect detection in the galaxy.


November 10, 2025, at 14:30 in P8445B
Dr. Qinrui Liu (SFU)
High-energy cosmic neutrinos: A unique window to the universe

The universe is a natural laboratory for investigating physics. The unique properties of neutrinos make them excellent cosmic messengers to explore astronomy, particle physics, and cosmology. The IceCube experiment discovered TeV-PeV neutrinos of cosmic origin. These neutrinos provide the only unobstructed view of cosmic accelerators that power the highest energy radiation from the universe while also offering a beam to study fundamental physics. Observations of high-energy cosmic neutrinos have yielded significant results in recent years, including the identification of extragalactic sources and emissions from the Galactic Plane, and the coming years are anticipated to mark a golden age for discoveries. In this talk, I will discuss ongoing efforts in neutrino source studies, the implications of the neutrino flavor composition, and the potential of probing dark matter and new physics. I will also remark on the detection prospects of the next-generation neutrino telescopes in addressing challenging questions.


October 27, 2025, at 14:30 in SSB7109
Prof. Levon Pogosian (SFU)
A theorist's perspective on cosmological tensions

With the increased precision of different types of cosmological measurements, certain tensions emerged between some of the datasets when interpreted within the standard Lambda Cold Dark Matter (LCDM) model. Most notable of them is the Hubble Tension, referring to the 5-sigma disagreement between the value of the Hubble constant predicted by the LCDM fit to cosmic microwave background (CMB) measurements and its direct determination from Cepheid-calibrated Type IA supernova. I will review the observational evidence for the tensions and some of the theoretical proposals aimed at solving them.


October 20, 2025, at 14:30 in P8445B
Dr. Meng-Xiang Lin (SFU)
Cosmological tensions and interactions between dark matter and dark energy

The nature of dark matter and dark energy remains one of the most profound mysteries in modern cosmology. In addition to these theoretical challenges, recent cosmological observations have revealed potential signs of new physics beyond the standard ΛCDM paradigm. In this talk, I will begin by briefly reviewing current cosmological tensions, including the latest DESI evidence for dynamical dark energy, the Hubble tension, and the S8 tension. I will then explore possible new physics underlying these tensions, with a particular focus on interactions between dark matter and dark energy. I will demonstrate that a simple coupling between the two components can simultaneously address two distinct anomalies: the DESI-indicated dynamical dark energy and the S8 tension. We propose a stable and technically natural particle physics realization of this idea, which exhibits an apparent phantom crossing behavior in the dark energy equation of state, consistent with DESI findings. The possible resolutions to the Hubble tension will also be discussed.


October 10, 2025, at 14:30 in AQ3149
Prof. Francis Halzen (University of Wisconsin-Madison)
IceCube: The first decade of neutrino astronomy (physics colloquium)

Below the geographic South Pole, the IceCube project has transformed one cubic kilometer of natural Antarctic ice into a neutrino detector. IceCube detects more than 100,000 neutrinos per year in the GeV to 10 PeV energy range. Among those, we have isolated a flux of high-energy neutrinos originating beyond our Galaxy, with an energy flux that is comparable to that of the extragalactic high-energy gamma-ray flux observed by astronomers. With a decade of data, we have identified their first sources, which point to the obscured dense cores associated with the supermassive black holes at the centers of active galaxies as the origin of high-energy neutrinos and high-energy cosmic rays. We recently also observed neutrinos originating in our own Milky Way which is, interestingly, not a prominent feature in the neutrino sky.


June 2, 2025, at 15:00 in P8445B
Helena Garcia Escudero (UC Irvine)
Beyond the Comfort of ΛCDM: Massive neutrinos, extra neutrinos, and other surprises in cosmology

Recent theoretical and observational insights suggest that the six-parameter ΛCDM model may no longer adequately describe cosmology. While datasets such as CMB anisotropies, BAO, type Ia supernovae, and large-scale structure generally align with ΛCDM, they often favor conflicting parameter spaces. Laboratory experiments confirm that neutrinos have mass, affecting cosmological observations through their gravitational effects. Furthermore, the Hubble tension remains a significant challenge to standard ΛCDM. This tension arises from discrepancies in the Hubble parameter values, derived either indirectly and model-dependently from the angular scale of standard rulers or more directly from the brightness of standard candles. In this talk, I will review the impact of neutrinos in cosmology, the current constraints on their mass hierarchy, and their role as a potential source of additional radiation. I will also address the subtle but persistent negative neutrino mass anomaly and its implications for model extensions beyond ΛCDM. Finally, assuming the Hubble tension is real, I will confirm that additional radiation density, possibly from neutrinos, could alleviate this tension.


March 19, 2025 at 15:30 in P8445A
Dr. David Miller (UBC)
Probing stellar evolution with the white dwarf initial-final mass relation

The initial-final mass relation (IFMR) links the final mass of a white dwarf (WD) to the initial mass of its progenitor star, making it a fundamental tool for understanding stellar evolution. It plays a crucial role in setting core-collapse supernova rates, compact object formation, and the broader evolution of galaxies through star formation and chemical enrichment. Open clusters provide an ideal setting for studying the IFMR, since all stars in a cluster form at roughly the same time, allowing for direct progenitor mass estimates. This talk will cover the IFMR, relevant stellar evolution processes, and its broader astrophysical significance, with sufficient background to ensure accessibility to a general physics audience. I will also highlight recent advancements in refining the IFMR using Gaia DR3 data, including a major update based on spectroscopically confirmed hydrogen-atmosphere WDs in open clusters and comparisons with alternative approaches.


March 12, 2025 at 15:30 in P8445B
Dr. Yukari Uchibori (UBC)
The quest to capture dark energy

Dark energy is a mysterious entity driving the accelerated expansion of the universe. Its nature remains one of the biggest open questions in modern cosmology. The Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME), a novel radio interferometer, is designed to probe this mystery by mapping the large-scale structure of the universe through the 21 cm emission line of neutral hydrogen. CHIME specifically measures the expansion rate during the critical epoch when dark energy’s influence became non-negligible. This seminar provides an overview of CHIME’s innovative design, observational techniques, and recent breakthroughs, including the first successful detections of 21 cm emission through cross-correlation studies. It also highlights CHIME’s broader contributions to astrophysics, such as fast radio burst and pulsar research. Additionally, the seminar introduces key cosmological concepts necessary to understand CHIME’s mission, ensuring accessibility to physicists at all levels, including undergraduates.


January 24, 2025 14:30 in BLU9660
Prof. Dragan Huterer (Michigan)
Cosmological results from DESI (physics colloquium)

The standard model of cosmology contains two mysterious components, dark matter and dark energy, that dominate the dynamics of the universe yet whosephysical origin is not well understood. I will briefly review the history and status of dark energy, the component that causes the accelerated expansion of the universe. I will also explain the physics behind how dark energy is constrained with cosmological observations. Then I will present and discuss cosmological results from the measurement of "baryon acoustic oscillations" in the first year of observations from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI Y1). These results, when combined with other data, have indicated a possible new anomaly in the behavior of dark energy, and provided unprecedented constraints on neutrino mass and primordial non-Gaussianity.


January 22, 2025 15:30 in P8445A
Prof. Kazuya Koyama (ICG, Porstmouth)
Theory activities in Euclid

I will present results from activities within the theory working group in the Euclid collaboration. Our main focus is the forecasts for Euclid’s abilities to constrains models beyond Lambda-CDM models. I will also present the efforts to validate the pipeline in beyond Lambda-CDM models including the comparison of N-body simulations, measurements of the power spectrum and the implementation of emulators to the likelihood code.


November 7, 2023 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Marcin Sawicki (Saint Mary’s)
JWST’s distant universe as seen by CANUCS

The James Webb Space Telescope has been the most anticipated astronomical observatory of the first part of the 21st century. And it has not disappointed: since the beginning of Webb’s science operations just over a year ago, amazing new discoveries made by JWST have been shedding new light on our understanding of the Universe and its contents. Having built of Webb’s four science instruments, NIRISS, Canadians are fully engaged in this research, learning about the Universe from the era of Cosmic Dawn (when galaxies were first forming) through Cosmic Noon (when the Universe was bursting with star formation), through to the current cosmic epoch. Along the way so far we have observed young galaxies getting assembled from their building blocks, found some of the first star clusters to have formed after the Big Bang, and saved cosmology as we know it from premature reports of its demise. This talk will give an overview of how Canada came to be a key player in Webb and will describe some of the results to have come from CANUCS, which stands for "Canadian NIRISS Unbiased Cluster Survey" and which is - at 200 hours of Guaranteed Time Observations - the largest JWST program to observe the distant Universe behind massive, gravitationally-lensing galaxy clusters.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>


October 31, 2023 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Shinji Mukohyama (YITP, Kyoto)
Dynamical approach to the cosmological constant revisited

The cosmological constant (cc) problem is one of the most difficult problems in theoretical physics and cosmology. The observational upper bound on the cc is smaller than what is naively expected quantum mechanically by 120 orders of magnitude. At present there is no theory that can convincingly explain this small value. In this talk I present a cosmological model of an early-time scenario that incorporates a relaxation process of the would-be large vacuum energy, followed by a reheating era connecting to the standard hot big bang universe.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>


September 14, 2023 13:00 in P8445B
Prof. Prajval Shastri (Indian Institute of Astrophysics)
Different angles on accreting supermassive black holes

Modern astrophysics uses state-of-the-art technology to unravel the unknown on a cosmic scale. Among the many discoveries are the heftiest things we know, namely giant black holes that inhabit the centres of galaxies. The early evidence for giant black holes that emerged in the middle of the last century, effectively rested on the Sherlock-Holmes argument. Today, however we have the most direct evidence possible through the sharpest eyes that technology can make. The talk will cover some of the threads in this fascinating story.


May 9, 2023 11:30 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>
Prof. José Tomás Gálvez Ghersi (Universidad de Ingeniería y Tecnología, Peru)
Dimensional deformation of sine-Gordon breathers into oscillons

Oscillons are localized field configurations oscillating in time with lifetimes orders of magnitude longer than their oscillation period. In this paper, we simulate non-travelling oscillons produced by deforming the breather solutions of the sine-Gordon model. Such a deformation treats the dimensionality of the model as a real parameter to produce spherically symmetric oscillons. After considering the post-transient oscillation frequency as a control parameter, we probe the initial parameter space to show how the availability of oscillons depends on the number of spatial dimensions. For small dimensional deformations, our findings are consistent with the lack of a minimal amplitude bound to form oscillons. In D≳2 spatial dimensions, we observe solutions undergoing intermittent phases of contraction and expansion in their cores. Knowing that stable and unstable configurations can be mapped to disjoint regions of the breather parameter space, we find that amplitude modulated solutions are located in the middle of both stability regimes. This displays the dynamics of critical behavior for solutions around the stability limit.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>


April 11, 2023 17:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>
Prof. Shinji Mukohyama (Kyoto)
Effective field theory of black hole perturbations with timelike scalar profile

Many dark energy (DE) models are based on a scalar field with timelike
gradient. In this talk we begin with a review of the systematic
construction of the effective field theory (EFT) describing
perturbations around the Minkowski background with a timelike scalar
profile and its extension to cosmological backgrounds, i.e. the ghost
condensation and the EFT of inflation/DE. If one hopes to learn
something about the EFT of DE from black holes (BHs) then one needs to
consider BH solutions with timelike scalar profiles. We thus extend
the EFT to arbitrary backgrounds. Finally, as an application of the
general EFT, we study odd-parity perturbations around a spherically
symmetric, static black hole background with a timelike scalar field
responsible for DE and compute quasi-normal mode frequencies.

<BR><BR>References:
<A HREF="https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.00228">arXiv:2204.00228</A>;
<A HREF="https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.02943">arXiv:2208.02943</A>

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>


January 25, 2023 13:00 in P8445A
Prof. Rajendra Gupta (Ottawa)
Do fundamental constants vary on cosmological time scale?

Since Dirac predicted in 1937 possible variation of gravitational constant and other coupling constants over cosmological time scales from his large number hypothesis, efforts have continued to determine such variation without success. Such efforts focus on the variation of one constant while assuming all others are pegged to their currently measured values. I have shown that the variations of the speed of light c, the gravitational constant G, the Planck constant h, and the Boltzmann constant k are interrelated - G~c<sup>3</sup>~h<sup>3</sup>~k<sup>3/2</sup> - through a dimensionless function. Thus, constraining any one of the constants leads to inadvertently constraining all the others. It may not be possible to determine the variation of a constant without concurrently permitting the variation of others. I will discuss several cosmological, astrometric, and terrestrial measurements that I have explained recently with the concomitant variation of these constants using their current time variation as G ̇⁄G=3 c ̇⁄c=3 h ̇⁄h=3⁄2  k ̇⁄k=3.90(±0.04)×10^(-10)  yr^(-1). They include gravitational lensing, gravitational waves, supernovae, quasars, gamma-ray bursts, lunar laser ranging, pulsars, and primordial nucleosynthesis used for constraining constants’ variation. The approach yields the age of the Universe 50% more than the presently accepted value; it may be better suited for explaining bewildering high redshift observations of galactic structures by the James Webb Space Telescope.


January 24, 2023 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Bartolomeo Fiorini (Queen Mary)
Studying large-scale structure probes of modified gravity with COLA

I will discuss how fast semi-analytical cosmological simulations allow us to accurately predict the effect of modified gravity theories on large-scale structure probes like power spectrum, bispectrum and voids.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>


November 8, 2022 11:00 in P8445A
Dr. Daniel Jiménez Aguilar (University of the Basque Country)
The dynamics of domain wall strings

In many field theories, solitonic solutions admit localized excitations with unnaturally long lifetimes in their spectrum of perturbations. These bound states may play a significant role in the dynamics of solitons, and in particular, they could shed light on some aspects concerning the evolution of cosmic string networks. In this talk I will discuss the influence of this type of excitations on the dynamics of string-like domain walls in 2+1 dimensions, focusing mostly on interesting resonance phenomena arising from the interaction of different modes at a non-linear level. The processes by which the excited string can emit radiation will also be analyzed, and the motion of the soliton in lattice field theory simulations will be contrasted with the one predicted by the Nambu-Goto action.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>


October 25, 2022 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Victor Pozsgay (Imperial College, London)
Low-energy EFT causality bounds

In this talk, I will present a new tool to constrain low-energy Wilson coefficients in a scalar EFT (scalar for simplicity's sake but the range of applicability is much wider) based on the requirement that such theories should respect causality. Causality will be defined in the sense that no low-energy observer should be able to measure any resolvable time-advance resulting from a scattering event. I will show that these so-called causality bounds are in remarkable agreement with previously derived positivity bounds (where low energy constraints on the 4-point amplitude make use of physical assumptions of the UV completion of the EFT), while being considerably simpler and a better candidate to get cosmological and black hole gravitational bounds.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">connect here</A>


October 5, 2022 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Chi-kwan Chan (Steward Observatory, U. of Arizona)
Resolving the galactic center black hole with the Event Horizon Telescope

In 2017, the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) observed the Galactic Center supermassive black hole Sagittarius A* (Sgr A*) using a global interferometric array of 8 telescopes. The resulting horizon scale images provide a unique opportunity to constrain the astrophysics of the accreting plasma and to test Einstein's general theory of relativity in a strong field regime. In this talk, I will introduce the EHT project and go over its data processing pathway and imaging methods. By comparing EHT's images with a large black hole simulation library, we constrain the properties of the accretion flow around Sgr A*. By comparing the size of the observed photon ring with the predicted size of the shadow, we show that EHT's observations are consistent with the general relativity.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">connect here</A>


October 4, 2022 11:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">Zoom</A>
Dr. Chad Briddon (Nottingham)
Using SELCIE to investigate screened scalar field models sourced by complex systems

The mechanism that produces the dark energy driving the expansion of the universe remains a mystery. One popular proposal is to have a scalar field play the role of dark energy. Such a field would have, at least, indirect coupling to matter and so result in a new fundamental force which could be used as a probe to detect these fields. However, no such 'fifth force' has been detected so far, placing strong constraints on models of this type. The 'chameleon' is a scalar field that couples to matter but due to its nonlinear effective potential it possesses a screening mechanism which allows it to evade detection in high density regions such as our solar system, while still having a measurable effect on cosmological scales. The difficulty of this and similar models is that the nonlinear equations lack known analytic solutions except in highly symmetric cases. To this end we have developed a Python package named SELCIE (Screening Equations Linearly Constructed and Iteratively Evaluated) which allows the user to construct systems with arbitrary density profiles and solve for the resulting chameleon field profile. It accomplishes this by using the gmsh and FEniCS software packages. This software has already been used to investigate which properties of NFW halos maximise the likelihood of detecting fifth forces generated by the chameleon field. Using this tool, we have been investigating how the chameleon fifth forces in vacuum chamber experiments depend on the shape of the source used.


April 14, 2022 15:00 in P8445A
Dr. Jose Tomas Galvez Ghersi (CITA)
Dimensional deformation of sine-Gordon breathers into oscillons

TBA


March 8, 2022 12:30 in P8445A
Prof. Tanmay Vachaspati (Arizona State University)
Electroweak monopoles, magnetic fields, and topological defect formation

I will argue that the vacuum manifold of the standard model of particle physics is better 
viewed as a Hopf fibered three sphere and that the model contains both magnetic monopoles 
and strings. The Kibble mechanism is applied to electroweak symmetry breaking to obtain the 
monopole-string network and to obtain an estimate for the cosmological magnetic field. 
A rigorous analysis of the quantum formation of topological defects will also be discussed
with results that can be compared to those using the Kibble-Zurek mechanism.

<BR><BR>Zoom: <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/61384563656?pwd=NGVDR0poY3Z2NHRkWHhSS09QZ1BiUT09">connect here</A>


September 15, 2020 12:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/91269506115?pwd=VWJFc2I4MU4zbVNHYW1xYStCaXFwZz09">Zoom</A>
Dr. Sashwat Tanay (University of Mississippi)
Integrability of eccentric, spinning black-hole binaries up to second post-Newtonian order

The task of modeling accurately the orbital dynamics of the sources of gravitational wave signals, i.e. stellar-mass, massive and supermassive black-hole binaries is crucial to the detections made by LIGO and the prospective findings of the LISA mission. The possibility of these systems being chaotic poses complications when modeling the dynamics of the system. Since integrability precludes chaos, here we report on the integrable nature of the post-Newtonian (PN) Hamiltonian for eccentric, spinning black-hole binaries. Integrability has been already known to be exact at 1.5PN, with five mutually commuting constants of motion in a ten dimensional phase-space. In this paper, we present four (out of five) action integrals at 1.5PN. Via the Liouville-Arnold theorem, we then show that the system is also integrable at 2PN in a perturbative sense by discovering quantities which are mutually commuting constants in the post-Newtonian sense at the same order.


July 28, 2020 12:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/91269506115?pwd=VWJFc2I4MU4zbVNHYW1xYStCaXFwZz09">Zoom</A>
Dr. José Tomas Gálvez Ghersi (University of Mississippi)
A fixed point for black hole distributions

Understanding distributions of black holes is crucial to both astrophysics and quantum gravity. Studying astrophysical population statistics has even been suggested as a channel to constrain black hole formation from the quantum vacuum. Here we propose a Gedankenexperiment to show that the non-linear properties of binary mergers (simulated with accurate surrogate models) generate an attractor in the space of distributions. Our results show that the joint distribution of spin magnitude and fractional mass loss evolves to a fixed point, converging in a few generations. The features of this fixed point distribution do not depend on the choice of initial distribution. Since a black hole merger is irreversible it produces entropy - possibly the largest source of entropy in the universe. The fixed-point distributions are neither isothermal nor isentropic, and initially thermodynamic states evolve away from thermality. We finally evaluate the specific entropy production rate per merger from initially thermal and non-thermal distributions, which converges to a constant.


July 7, 2020 12:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/91269506115?pwd=VWJFc2I4MU4zbVNHYW1xYStCaXFwZz09">Zoom</A>
Prof. Joanna Woo (Simon Fraser Univeristy)
Machine learning as a tool for astrophysics

The number of machine learning papers in astronomy and astrophysics have dramatically increased in the last few years.  After reviewing astrophysical applications and methods, I will present results from my own work on stellar populations in galaxies.   The focus will be mostly pedagogical with the aim of demonstrating the power and applicability of machine learning methods.


July 2, 2020 at 14:30 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/96010086553?pwd=MmIrR0lxRUloMGd1cUg5YkRGc0NZdz09">Zoom</A>
Prof. Jack Gegenberg (University of New Brunswick)
Collapse of a rotating shell in 3+1 dimensions (special seminar)

We consider a rotating thin shell which is on the boundary between a near horizon extremal Kerr spacetime and a static near horizon spacetime. The matter on the shell is taken to be described by the stress-energy tensor of an anisotropic fluid. We show that the shell does not collapse through the horizon of the outer geometry.


June 16, 2020 12:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/91269506115?pwd=VWJFc2I4MU4zbVNHYW1xYStCaXFwZz09">Zoom</A>
Prof. Andrei Frolov (Simon Fraser Univeristy)
Primordial non-Gaussianity from preheating

I will talk about phase transitions and entropy production at the end of inflation in the early universe. Dynamics of preheating is non-trivial, and can convert isocurvature modes of light fields generated during inflation into curvature fluctuations imprinted into observable CMB temperature anisotropy. Curvature fluctuations thus produced are typically non-Gaussian. I will discuss their observational signatures, and our efforts to construct local non-Gaussianity estimators to map out such signal in real data.


June 2, 2020 12:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/91269506115?pwd=VWJFc2I4MU4zbVNHYW1xYStCaXFwZz09">Zoom</A>
Prof. Leo Stein (University of Mississippi)
Gravitational-wave tests of GR with simulations of beyond-GR theories

Present and next generation gravitational-wave observatories bring the opportunity for precision tests of general relativity. To compare GR vs. beyond-GR (BGR) requires the BGR waveforms have the same level of sophistication as available for GR. In the nonlinear regime of black hole mergers, GR waveform predictions rely on numerical simulations. Meanwhile, BH merger simulations have only recently become possible in theories like Einstein-dilaton-Maxwell, dynamical Chern-Simons gravity, or Einstein-dilaton-Gauss-Bonnet. We highlight some of the recent advances in numerical simulations of beyond-GR theories, and discuss some conceptual and computational issues in treating these theories. We will also examine the difficulty of secular effects, and prospects for completing the waveform modeling problem in beyond-GR theories.


May 19, 2020 12:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/91269506115?pwd=VWJFc2I4MU4zbVNHYW1xYStCaXFwZz09">Zoom</A>
Dr. José Tomas Gálvez Ghersi (University of Mississippi)
Numerical renormalization group-based approach to secular perturbation theory

The standard methods of perturbative analysis are crucial to revealing many features of a physical system when it is not viable to obtain exact solutions. Nevertheless, the use of a truncated expansion might generate diverging solutions in systems that are known to be bound. Following the perspective of secular perturbation theory, we propose the numerical implementation of a renormalization group-based approach to promote the background parameters into time-dependent quantities. These new quantities are not restricted only to avoid secular growth, but can also improve the accuracy of the solution. As a concrete example, we use this method to calculate the soliton-like solutions of the Korteweg-de Vries equation deformed by adding a small damping term. This example shares several features with the evaluation of gravitational waveforms modified by perturbative corrections of general relativity.


May 12, 2020 12:00 in <A HREF="https://sfu.zoom.us/j/91269506115?pwd=VWJFc2I4MU4zbVNHYW1xYStCaXFwZz09">Zoom</A>
Prof. Levon Pogosian (SFU)
Relieving the Hubble tension with primordial magnetic fields

The standard cosmological model determined from the accurate cosmic microwave background measurements made by the Planck satellite implies a value of the Hubble constant H<sub>0</sub> that is 4.4 standard deviations lower than the one determined from Type Ia supernovae. The Planck best fit model also predicts higher values of the matter density fraction Ωm and clustering amplitude &sigma;<sub>8</sub> compared to those obtained from the Dark Energy Survey Year 1 data. Here we show that accounting for the enhanced recombination rate due to additional small-scale inhomogeneities in the baryon density may solve both the H<sub>0</sub> and the &sigma;<sub>8</sub>-&Omega;<sub>m</sub> tensions. The additional baryon inhomogeneities can be induced by primordial magnetic fields present in the plasma prior to recombination. The required field strength to solve the Hubble tension is just what is needed to explain the existence of galactic, cluster, and extragalactic magnetic fields without relying on dynamo amplification. Our results show clear evidence for this effect and motivate further detailed studies of primordial magnetic fields, setting several well-defined targets for future observations.


February 28, 2020, 14:30 in C9000
Prof. Sara Ellison (University of Victoria)
Clash of the Titans: Galaxy mergers in the nearby Universe (physics colloquium)

Astronomy's current model of galaxy evolution is built on a foundation of hierarchical growth, in which small galaxies merge together to form larger ones. In addition to the simple accrual of mass, this merging process is predicted to fundamentally change the galaxies' properties, such as dramatic morphological transformations, the triggering of bursts of star formation and high rates of accretion onto the central supermassive black hole. In this talk I will explain the physical processes behind these predictions, and present the observations that we are performing in order to test the theory. Although many of the predictions are indeed borne out by experiment, there have been some surprising conflicts as well, that demand revisions to our models of how mergers shape galaxy evolution.


February 26, 2020, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Paul Wiegert (University of Western Ontario)
Interstellar asteroids and comets: what are they and where do they come from?

In 2017, the first asteroid to enter our Solar System from interstellar space was discovered at the PanSTARRS telescope in Hawaii, and has now been named 'Oumuamua, a Hawaiian term which signifies 'Messenger from Afar'. In 2019 a second interstellar visitor, comet Borisov (named after its discoverer) appeared. Adding to the mystery of their origins are their contrasting properties: 'Oumuamua was rocky (unexpected), relatively slow (unexpected) and small (expected); while Borisov is the reverse: icy, fast and large. I'll briefly summarize what we know about these puzzling visitors, and outline the efforts being made at Western to back-track them to their points of origin, somewhere within our Milky Way galaxy.


February 14, 2020, 14:30 in C9000
Prof. Katie Mack (North Carolina State University)
Dark matter: a cosmological perspective (physics colloquium)

While it is considered to be one of the most promising hints of new physics beyond the Standard Model, dark matter is as-yet known only through its gravitational influence on astronomical and cosmological observables. I will discuss our current best evidence for dark matter's existence as well as the constraints that astrophysical probes can place on its properties, while highlighting some tantalizing anomalies that could indicate non-gravitational dark matter interactions. Future observations, along with synergies between astrophysical and experimental searches, have the potential to illuminate dark matter's fundamental nature and its influence on the evolution of matter in the cosmos from the first stars and galaxies to today.


January 20, 2020, 15:00 in P8445B
Prof. Francesc Ferrer (Washington University)
Gravitational wave signals of early universe axion dynamics

The detection of gravitational waves from the merger of black  holes of several tens of solar masses has reignited the interest of primordial black holes (PBHs) as the source of part of the dark matter in the universe. A small relic abundance of heavy PBHs may play an important role in the generation of cosmological structures, and we will discuss how such a PBH population can be generated by the collapse of axionic topological defects created during the QCD phase transition. Furthermore, some axion-like particle (ALP) models feature a strong first order phase transition at a high energy scale, ~ f<sub>a</sub>. We will show how future gravitational-wave experiments can probe the ALP parameter  space in a way that is complementary to current laboratory and astrophysical searches.


December 3, 2019, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Ludovic Van Waerbeke (UBC)
Axion Quark Nuggets: a candidate for baryonic, cold and strongly interacting dark matter

Let's assume dark matter is a particle. The DM theories currently tested, WIMPs-like, either via direct or indirect detection, cover only a tiny range of the allowed DM parameters space, and have not been particularly successful so far. A new DM candidate, the Axion Quark Nugget (AQN), has been proposed by Zhitnitsky in 2003, partly inspired by the quark nuggets (Witten 1984). In the AQN model, DM particles are very massive (gram mass or more) and interact very rarely, but very strongly, with the baryonic sector. They behave as cold dark matter, but they can induce various electromagnetic signals under certain conditions, without violating nucleosynthesis or any known Big Bang fundamental constraints. In this talk I will review the basic properties of the model and discuss some of our ongoing research projects at UBC in order to test the model. This requires a very interdisciplinary approach, by looking at how AQNs interact with planets, stellar atmospheres, compact objects, and up to the largest cosmological scales. This makes AQN a highly testable DM model, with potential for direct detection, unlike most currently popular WIMPs alternatives.


November 26, 2019, 14:30 in P8445B
Dr. Joanna Woo (SFU)
Primer on machine learning for astronomy

As the size and scope of astronomical datasets have grown exponentially, so also have the use of machine learning methods in their analysis. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in particular have proven to be one of the most powerful machine learning algorithms. I will introduce the basic concepts behind CNNs and how they are employed in astronomy for classification, measurement, error estimation, and generation of mock datasets. I will go over the basic computational implementation of CNNs using Google's Keras/Tensorflow python packages.


November 19, 2019, 14:30 in P8445B
Dr. Richard Shaw (UBC)
Probing Dark Energy with CHIME

CHIME will use Intensity Mapping of the 21cm line of neutral hydrogen to map large-scale structure between redshifts of 0.8 and 2.5. By measuring Baryon Acoustic Oscillations (BAO) we will place constraints on the dark energy equation of state as it begins to dominate the expansion of the Universe, particularly at redshifts poorly probed by current BAO surveys. In this talk I will introduce CHIME, a transit radio interferometer designed specifically for this purpose. I will discuss the promise and pitfalls of Intensity Mapping and describe how we plan to confront the many challenges of such observations, in particular removal of astrophysical foregrounds which are six orders of magnitude larger than the 21cm signal. CHIME started operating at the DRAO in Penticton, BC at the end of 2018 and I will report on current progress and lessons already learned.


October 22, 2019, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Arif Babul (UVic)
Cosmology with galaxy clusters

Clusters of galaxies are the largest, most massive gravitationally bound objects in the Universe. They are also the most recent of the cosmic objects to form. In the currently accepted models of cosmic structure formation, the evolution of the number density of these galaxy clusters over the recent (cosmologically speaking) past depends sensitively on the parameters describing the large-scale geometry and the expansion history of the universe. For this reason, galaxy clusters are regarded as important cosmological probes. The first step in using clusters as cosmological probes involves involves starting with a large, well-defined sample of galaxy clusters and "weigh them". Here, I will discuss what "weighing them" entails and highlight some of the challenges involved. I will then summarize the outcome of the cosmological analysis, and compare the resulting values of the key cosmological parameters to those derived from the studies of the cosmic microwave background. Interestingly, the two do not agree with each other! And, this troubling tension remains unresolved. I will conclude by speculating about the implications of, and potential resolutions, of this tension.


October 8, 2019, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Douglas Scott (UBC)
Evaporating evidence for Hawking points

We investigate recent claims for a detection of "Hawking points" (positions on the sky with unusually large temperature gradients between rings) in the cosmic microwave background temperature maps.


September 17, 2019, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Andrei Frolov (SFU)
Dust is everywhere

The simple story of primordial gravitational waves produced by inflation sourcing B-modes of Cosmic Microwave Background polarization in reality is complicated by the fact that we are looking through the coloured glass of astrophysical foregrounds originating much closer to home. I will talk about amplitude of primordial B-modes we expect from inflation, characterization of polarized dust foregrounds from Planck Legacy data, and where do we go from here. In particular, I will show new reconstruction of the large-scale galactic magnetic field responsible for the patterns we see in the dust polarization, and explain how it allows accurate modelling of the polarized dust emission for design and analysis of future CMB experiments.


September 10, 2019, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Gabor Kunstatter (University of Winnipeg/SFU)
What can quantum gravity tell us about the beginning and end of time?

Despite remarkable advances in observational astrophysics and cosmology, fundamental mysteries about our universe remain. General relativity, which describes the dynamics of space and time, predicts its own demise near the Big Bang singularity (the beginning of time) and near the future singularity at the center of all black holes (the end of time). These singularities lead to the horizon loss problem and information loss conundrum, respectively. Quantum mechanics is expected to cure all singularities but no complete, testable theory of quantum gravity exists as yet. It is therefore useful to tackle these issues using simplified, highly symmetric models. After an introduction to the horizon problem and information loss conundrum, I will describe recent attempts by myself and collaborators to model quantum gravitational dynamics near cosmological and black hole singularities.


February 5, 2019, 15:00 in P8445B
Prof. Andrew Long (University of Michigan)
Dark photon dark matter from a network of cosmic strings

Although the evidence for a dark form of matter in the Universe is overwhelming, we still know next to nothing about its properties and interactions. In this talk I will suppose that dark matter is a condensate of ultra-light, spin-1 particles, known as dark photons, and I will discuss how dark matter is produced from a network of near-global, Abelian-Higgs cosmic strings.


January 17, 2019, 10:30 in P8445B
Prof. Gabor Kunstatter (University of Winnipeg)
Lost Horizons: The Dynamics of Singularity Resolution in General Relativity

LIGO has recently provided remarkable, direct evidence that black holes exist, and that their strong field dynamics is well described by Einstein's theory of general relativity. As well, the CMB data provides us with equally remarkable data concerning the structure of the Universe a mere few thousand years after the Big Bang. Einstein's theory is in the unique and unenviable position of predicting its own demise under rather generic conditions, including those found in black hole spacetimes and at the early stages of our own universe. The predicted singularities (another word for demise) in general give rise to horizons beyond which certain classes of observers cannot see. This in turn results in issues such as the black hole information loss conundrum and the cosmological horizon problem. It is thought the singularities and their related conundra will be resolved by the ultimate quantum theory of gravity. Unfortunately, we do not as yet have a complete, testable theory of quantum gravity that be can reliably used to address this issue. In this talk, I will instead explore recent work whose goal is to use simple models to examine the effective dynamics of complete singularity-free quantum-corrected physical space-times.


November 21, 2018, 15:30 in P8445B
Dr. Jia Liu (Princeton)
Cosmology with massive neutrinos

The non-zero mass of neutrinos suppresses the growth of cosmic structure on small scales. Since the level of suppression depends on the sum of the masses of the three active neutrino species, the evolution of large-scale structure is a promising tool to constrain the total mass of neutrinos and possibly shed light on the mass hierarchy. I will discuss recent progress and future prospects to constrain the neutrino mass sum with cosmology.


September 21, 2018, 14:30 in AQ3150
Prof. Rob Caldwell (Dartmouth College)
Polarization of the cosmic gravitational wave background (physics colloquium)

The Cosmic Gravitational Wave Background (CGB) is a hypothesized relic radiation field that, if detected, would give us clues to the earliest moments of the history of the Universe. In this talk accessible to students and non-experts, I will describe the physical processes that can give rise to a CGB, novel features including its polarization, and methods of detection. I will also discuss the ability of the proposed Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, LISA, to detect the CGB.


August 16, 2018, 13:30 in P8445B
Prof. Shinji Mukohyama (Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics)
Minimalism in modified gravity

It is generally believed that modification of general relativity inevitably introduce extra physical degree(s) of freedom. In this talk I argue that this is not the case by constructing modified gravity theories with two local physical degrees of freedom. After classifying such theories into two types, I show explicit examples and discuss their cosmology and phenomenology.


March 29, 2018, 13:30 in P8445B
Dr. Michael Desrochers (UBC)
Topological vacuum energy

Topological vacuum energy is a newly formulated type of energy that should provide corrections to the usual Casimir effect and, perhaps more striking, might be a candidate to replace the role of the inflaton in cosmological evolution. This topological vacuum energy is generated by tunneling transitions between different homotopy states of the vacuum in Yang-mills theories. Of these Yang-Mills theories, QCD will be discussed for the cosmological discussion and QED for the Topological Casimir effect. A pedagogical discussion on what this topological vacuum energy is,  and how this type of vacuum energy can possibly relate to cosmology will be presented.


March 16, 2018, 14:30 in WMC3260
Prof. Frans Pretorius (Princeton University)
The dynamical, strong-field regime of General Relativity (physics colloquium)

LIGO has ushered in the era of gravitational wave astronomy, having observed several signals consistent with binary black hole mergers, and one attributable to a binary neutron star collision. The latter event also produced significant electromagnetic radiation, and was observed across the spectrum by a host of telescopes and satellites. In this talk I will discuss what these events can teach us about the fundamental nature of dynamical, strong-field gravity. So far, the data is consistent with Einstein's theory of general relativity, though the quantitative bounds are weak. In the coming years we can anticipate an ever growing population of merger events detected with ever more sensitive instruments, allowing high precision tests of strong-field gravity, ruling out alternative theories and "exotic" compact objects, or discovering novel physics beyond general relativity.


March 15, 2018, 13:30 in P8445B
Prof. Hideki Maeda (Hokkai-Gakuen University)
Exact black hole formation from a conformally coupled scalar field in three dimensions

We present exact dynamical and inhomogeneous solutions in three-dimensional AdS gravity with a conformally coupled scalar field. They contain stealth configurations of the scalar field overflying the BTZ spacetime and also the solution with a non-stealth scalar field obtained by Xu in a mush simpler coordinate system. We show that different domains of coordinates of the last solution represent distinct spacetimes. One of them is the maximal extension of the Xu's spacetime and represents a shrinking black hole. Another spacetime can be attached to the past AdS spacetime in a regular manner and then the whole spacetime represents the gravitational collapse from regular initial data. It is shown that the resulting singularity is censored and the spacetime represents the formation of a black hole under an assumption for future-directed radial null geodesics, but the proof without the assumption is left open.


March 9, 2018, 14:30 in WMC3260
Prof. Ken Clark (Queen's University)
Dark matter: How to hunt for the unknown (CAP Lecture)

The quest for understanding the dark matter which pervades our universe has been proceeding for many years and is approaching a momentous time. The existence of this elusive matter is now widely accepted, and considerable experimental effort is directed at deducing its fundamental properties. This talk will focus on results and prospects from two experiments using complementary search techniques. The first is the PICO experiment, a superheated liquid detector at SNOLAB which recently published world-leading results. The second is the IceCube/DeepCore experiment situated in the deep ice at the South Pole and using neutrinos to look for the annihilation signal. Along with the future of  these experiments, the imminent challenges to all direct detection experiments will also be discussed.


March 1, 2018, 13:30 in P8445B
Prof. Tanmay Vachaspati (Arizona State)
Search for intergalactic magnetic fields and implications

The ongoing search for intergalactic magnetic fields using blazar observations suggests field strength in the 10<sup>-14</sup> to 10<sup>-17</sup> G range on  tens of Mpc length scales. Such fields can have important implications for the early universe and also raises some puzzles.


January 31, 2018, 14:30 in P9449
Prof. Gabor Kunstatter (University of Winnipeg)
Gradient Flow of Holographic Superconductors

High T<sub>C</sub> superconductors are now thought to be strongly coupled systems and hence difficult to analyze. The holography principle, specifically the AdS/CFT conjecture, may provide a mechanism for studying strongly coupled systems via the analysis of dual weakly coupled gravitational systems. Models for holographic superconductors were first proposed by Hartnoll et al almost 10 years ago. Gradient flow is a very general analogue of the heat equation: dT/dt = &alpha;<sup>2</sup> &nabla;<sup>2</sup> T and powerful theoretical tool for exploring a system's potential energy/free energy landscape.  In the case of ordinary superconductors it is the basis for the time dependent Ginsburg-Landau equations. After providing an introduction to AdS/CFT and gradient flow, I will describe work in progress whose ultimate goal is to shed light on the near equilibrium behaviour of strongly coupled  systems by studying gradient flow of the holographic superconductor.


January 24, 2018, 14:30 in P8445B
Dr. Yuri V. Gusev (Lebedev Research Center in Physics, Moscow)
Thermal radiation of finite size emitters

The thermal radiation laws of Planck, Stefan-Boltzmann and Wien are not exact in their textbook forms because any radiating body or cavity (emitter) has a finite size and a shape. The finite size effects are usually neglected because their magnitudes are assumed to be below experimental precisions. However the study of experimental data in the literature on the integral law of thermal radiation (Stefan-Boltzmann’s) shows that the leading order deviation defined by the boundary’s area, which erroneously was deemed nil in theoretical literature, is apparently observed. This term, first conjectured by H. Weyl, is proportional to the third power of temperature and inversely proportional to the emitter's effective size. The proposed formula is in agreement with a number of experiments and may be valid beyond the 'high temperature' approximation. The cubic temperature term explains an intrinsic uncertainty of the NPL radiometric determination of the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. It is apparent in the NIST calibrations of cryogenic blackbodies. Its relevance to the size of source effect in optical radiometry is proposed and supported by the thermal emission of nano-heaters. The finite-size contributions of thermal radiation have implications for fundamental and applied physics.


January 16, 2018, 13:00 in P8445B
Prof. Vitaly Vanchurin (University of Minnesota Duluth)
General Relativity from non-equilibrium thermodynamics of quantum information

In this talk I will argue that general relativity may be viewed as a useful limit of quantum mechanics with many degrees of freedom, very much like thermodynamics is a useful limit of classical mechanics with many degrees of freedom. First, I will construct statistical ensembles of ket-vectors using spatially covariant dual field theories with a metric tensor playing the role of a conjugate thermodynamic variable to the information tensor (which is related to both Fisher matrix and Fubini-Study metric). Secondly, I will analyze evolution of the ensembles of ket-vectors to argue that an approximate space-time covariance of the dual field theories can be achieved if certain quantum computational complexities are minimized. And finally, I will show that minimization of a non-equilibrium entropy production can lead to the Einstein-Hilbert dynamics of the metric tensor for a particularly simple and highly symmetric form of the Onsager tensor.


October 4, 2017, 13:30 in P8445B
Dr. Gwendolyn Eadie (University of Washington)
The Milky Way meets hierarchical Bayes

The Milky Way's fundamental properties, such as its total mass, are useful for placing our Galaxy in the context of other galaxies, and for testing cosmological theories about galaxy formation, evolution, and dark matter content. In this talk, I will present a hierarchical Bayesian method I have developed to measure the total mass and cumulative mass profile of the Milky Way. I will also discuss our most recent results, which include: (1) estimates for the Milky Way's mass when the method is applied to real globular cluster data, and (2) estimates for simulated Milky-Way type galaxies from the cosmological, hydrodynamical McMaster Unbiased Galaxy Simulations. I will summarize the implications of these results and how they are directing our future studies of the Milky Way.


April 4, 2017, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Kiyoshi Masui (UBC)
Fast Radio Bursts: Mysterious flashes from cosmological distances

Fast radio bursts (FRBs) are a recently discovered and poorly understood class of astronomical transient, observed at gigahertz frequencies and with millisecond durations. The dispersion of these signals by intervening plasma indicates that the sources are extragalactic and may even be at cosmological distances. Their high rate (with thousands occurring daily) and extreme brightnesses have made them challenging to explain theoretically. This challenge has been exacerbated by the fact that only a few dozen bursts have been captured to date, and by the limited information garnered from each event. However, 2016 was a bumper year for FRBs observationally, culminating in the identification of an FRB's host galaxy. I will summarize these recent results as well as describe the CHIME/FRB project, which will observe thousands of bursts starting later in 2017.


March 10, 2017 at 14:30 in C9000
Prof. Mark Van Raamsdonk (UBC)
Gravity and entanglement (physics colloquium)

The AdS/CFT correspondence from string theory provides a quantum theory of gravity in which spacetime and gravitational physics emerge from an ordinary non-gravitational quantum system with many degrees of freedom. In this talk, I will explain how quantum entanglement between these degrees of freedom is crucial for the emergence of a classical spacetime, and describe progress in understanding how spacetime dynamics (gravitation) arises from the physics of quantum entanglement.


January 31, 2017, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. David Langlois (APC, Paris)
Degenerate higher order scalar tensor theories beyond Horndeski

This seminar will present scalar tensor theories whose Lagrangian contains second order
derivatives of a scalar field and which propagate only one scalar mode, in addition to the
two tensor modes. These theories encompass and extend the so-called Horndeski theories. I
will discuss some phenomenological aspects of these new theories.


January 24, 2017, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Daniele Steer (APC, Paris 7)
Alternatives to General Relativity: Counting the degrees of freedom in "Horndeski-like" theories

Scalar-tensor theories of gravity are widely used in cosmology and extensions of general relativity, with applications ranging from inflation to the late-time observed acceleration of the Universe, and tests of gravitation. In this talk we focus on so-called "Horndeski-like" theories - scalar-tensor theories in 4 dimensions having field equations (both for the metric and the scalar) with derivatives of order less than or equal to two - as well as some extensions of these which have been proposed recently. As we will discuss, having covariant second-order field equations is a priori enough, once diffeomorphism invariance is taken into account, to have just 3 propagating degrees of freedom in vacuum (counting 2 for the metric and 1 for the scalar), and to put the theory on the safe side as far as Ostrogradski’s type of instability is concerned. But there seem to be exceptions: indeed the extensions mentioned above appear to have higher order equations of motion and yet propagate 3 degrees of freedom. We will try to clarify these different points, all of which are relevant for the applications of these theories.


October 14, 2016, 14:30 in C9000
Prof. Keith Vanderlinde (Dunlap Institute)
Cosmology, cell phones, and video games: Mapping dark energy with CHIME (physics colloquium)

Among the great surprises of modern cosmology was the discovery of Dark Energy, which dominates the energy budget of the Universe and is driving the acceleration of its expansion rate. Decyphering its properties and nature will require novel measurements spanning vast swaths of the observable Universe. In this talk, I will introduce the Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME), an ambitious project to study Dark Energy by tracing out 4 billion years of cosmic history, using a purpose-built radio telescope at the Dominion Radio Astrophysical Observatory (DRAO) in B.C.’s Okanagan Valley.

Hydrogen Intensity (HI) mapping uses redshifted 21cm emission from neutral hydrogen as a 3D tracer of Large Scale Structure (LSS) in the Universe. Imprinted in the LSS is a remnant of acoustic waves which propagated through the primordial plasma of the nascent cosmos. This "Baryon Acoustic Oscillation" (BAO) feature, which appears as a spatial correlation of LSS, can be used as a standard ruler to trace the expansion history of the Universe, thereby allowing us to constrain the Dark Energy equation of state.

CHIME is a transit interferometer with no moving parts, which uses a massive computing backend to image the radio sky from 400-800MHz, corresponding to 21cm radiation emanating from a redshift range of 0.8 < z < 2.5. Earth rotation sweeps its field of view across the sky, resulting in complete daily coverage of the northern celestial hemisphere and an unprecedented survey sensitivity.

I wil discuss the motivation, design, and progress on CHIME and its reduced-scale Pathfinder, as well as a pair of extensions which will probe the high-cadence time-domain radio sky, monitoring radio pulsars and exploring a more recent mystery in radio astronomy, the possibly-cosmological Fast Radio Bursts.


August 4, 2016, 14:30 in P8445B
Dr. Alexander Vikman (IoP of the Czech Academy of Sciences)
Canonical exorcism for cosmological ghosts

We discuss time-dependent classical and quantum canonical transformation. In particular, we demonstrated that for the quantum canonical transformations the Hamiltonian is transformed as a connection in non-abelian gauge theories. We explicitly construct such quantum and classical transformations which change the sign the Hamiltonian. Hence one can canonically transform a ghost into a field with the correct standard sign in front of the quadratic action. Therefore the usual naive criteria for the presence or absence of ghost-like vacuum instabilities on time-dependent backgrounds are not well physically motivated and the actual information about instabilities is hidden in the interactions.


March 17, 2016, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Francesc Ferrer (Washington University in St Louis)
Managing astrophysical uncertainties in dark matter detection

Save for its gravitational effects, very little is known about the composition of the dark matter in the universe. An attractive candidate for making up the dark matter is a weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP), that could be unveiled through its weak-scale interactions using two complementary approaches: direct and indirect detection. Although these programs have attained the sensitivity to probe the particle physics properties in a vast range of WIMP scenarios, they are hampered by uncertainties in the required astrophysical input. In this talk I will review our present understanding of the density and velocity distribution of the dark matter halo, and describe several efforts to constrain the WIMP scattering cross section using observables that are largely halo-independent. Finally, I will show that, by combining null results from direct detection experiments and neutrino telescopes, it is possible to set an upper limit on the scattering cross section independently of the velocity distribution.


March 1, 2016, 15:00 in P8445B
Prof. Gabor Kunstatter (University of Winnipeg)
Formation and evaporation of nonsingular black holes in new 2d gravity

I will first briefly review the key features of the black hole information loss paradox and the famous &quot;firewall&quot; resolution of Almheiri, Marolf, Polchinski and Susskind. I will then go on to describe my own work on a different, considerably more mundane solution to the problem based on the observation that the singularity at the center of all black holes lies at the heart of the information loss conundrum. Specifically, I will present a new class of 2D effective actions that can be used to describe the formation and evaporation of non-singular black holes. We are currently completing numerical calculations that will hopefully show that the usual event horizon of the black holes in these theories is replaced by a compact trapping horizon that allows the information  to emerge gradually as the black hole evaporates, thereby solving the information loss conundrum.


November 6, 2015 at 14:30 in C9000
Prof. John Kormendy (University of Texas at Austin)
Supermassive black holes in galaxy nuclei: Coevolution (or not) of black holes and host galaxies (physics colloquium)

Supermassive black holes (BHs) with masses of ~ 10<sup>6</sup> to 10<sup>9</sup> Solar masses are believed to live at the centers of most large galaxies.  I review the observed demographics and inferred evolution of BHs found by spatially resolved kinematic measurements.  Tight correlations between BH mass and the mass and velocity dispersion of the host-galaxy bulge have led to the belief that BHs and bulges coevolve by regulating each other's growth.  New results replace this simple story with a richer and more plausible picture in which BHs correlate differently with different galaxy components.  This allows us to refine our picture of BH-galaxy coevolution, which clearly is important in some objects (giant elliptical galaxies) and not in others (disk galaxies like our Milky Way).  A major area of galaxy research is to investigate why some galaxies actively form stars and others do not -- they are &quot;red and dead&quot;.  Many lines of research now converge on a unified picture of the quenching of star formation in the nearby Universe. The main quenching agents are (1) starbursts and BH energy feedback in galaxy collisions and mergers that involve cold gas and (2) hot, X-ray-emitting gas in giant galaxies and clusters of galaxies.


Oct 30, 2015 at 14:30 in C9000
Prof. Mark Halpern (UBC)
Measuring the acceleration history of the Universe with CHIME (physics colloquium)

Density fluctuations in the Universe <I>before</I> the hot big bang propagated in the plasma of the early universe as acoustic waves. They produced the features which we have measured in the Comic Microwave Background and used to constrain the age and composition of the Universe.  When the Universe became transparent, these density waves stopped moving,  leaving spherical features of known (enormous) size. We are building a novel radio telescope, CHIME, to measure the apparent size of these features as a function of redshift in an effort to determine the expansion history of the Universe and constrain models of dark energy. I will review what we have learned from these baryon acoustic oscillations in the CMB and give a progress report on CHIME.


March 5, 2015, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Scott Chapman (Dalhousie University)
Studying the epoch of inflation with the cosmic microwave background

In the first fraction of a second after the birth of the Universe, space underwent a period of superluminal expansion which we call cosmic inflation. The theory of cosmic inflation was originally proposed in the 1980s to explain the observed geometry and smoothness of the universe. The residual quantum fluctuations from this epoch of inflation seeded the formation of structure in the Universe and left behind a relic background of gravitational waves. These gravitational waves imprint a unique pattern of polarization onto the CMB which may have been recently detected by the BICEP2 experiment operating at the South Pole. This groundbreaking measurement would suggest that the epoch of cosmic inflation occurred t~1e–36 seconds after the Big Bang. The energy-density of the universe at this epoch was 13 orders-of-magnitude larger than the energies probed by the LHC and near the GUT scale, where the strengths of the strong, weak and electromagnetic forces are thought to converge. The detection of this signal is a revolution in our understanding of the beginning of the Universe. It ties together the most disparate scales possible in science: quantum mechanics and cosmology; the beginning of the universe to the present day. If confirmed by the POLARBEAR-2 and SPT-3G experiments, the BICEP2 result may be the most important scientific discovery of this century.

Dr. Chapman will present an overview of the scientific questions which are currently being addressed by studying the cosmic microwave background (CMB). He will discuss the signature of inflation, experimental techniques, and focus on detector technology for POLARBEAR-2 and SPT-3G. Dr. Chapman's group has initiated a program to lithographically develop cold, superconducting electronics for reading out arrays of Transition-Edge Sensor (TES) Bolometers. The POLARBEAR experiment, faced a challenging problem in that the LC resonators used in previous experiments were found to have too much loss to be used at the higher frequencies needed for the high multiplexing factor in second generation POLARBEAR-2 / Simons Array / SPT-3G experiments. Our group has played a key role in lithographically developing a new fully superconducting resonator which is now these experiments' baseline. The two layer process has explored Nb, Va, and Al, along with various etch and lift-off techniques. We describe the fabrication process and testing of devices leading to a mature technology which is entering a ‘mass production’ phase for the POLARBEAR-2 and South Pole Telescope experiments.


January 26, 2015, 12:00 in P8445B
Dr. Gong-Bo Zhao (NAOC, Beijing and ICG, Portsmouth)
Cosmological tests of gravity

In this talk, I will be presenting methods and results of cosmological tests of gravity on both linear and nonlinear scales. On linear scales, I will introduce the principle component analysis (PCA) method for the model-independent gravity test and use this method to estimate the constraining power of future imaging and spectroscopic surveys. On nonlinear scales,  I will present the high-resolution N-body simulations of modified gravity models and show the imprint of nonlinear screening effect on matter power spectrum and mass function. I will also talk about applications of these simulations, including a new GR test using the environmental effect, and a modified gravity extension of Halofit.


January 20, 2015, 15:30 in P8445B
Dr. Alessandra Silvestri (Lorentz Institute, Leiden)
Testing gravity within the EFT framework of cosmic acceleration

More than a decade after its discovery, cosmic acceleration still poses a puzzle for modern cosmology and a plethora of models of dark energy or modified gravity, able to reproduce the observed expansion history, have been proposed as alternatives to the cosmological standard model. In recent years it has become increasingly evident that probes of the expansion history are not sufficient to distinguish among the candidate models, and that it is necessary to combine those with observations that probe the dynamics of inhomogeneities. Future cosmological surveys will map the evolution of inhomogeneities to high accuracy, allowing us to test the relationships between matter overdensities, local curvature, and the Newtonian potential on cosmological scales.

I will discuss theoretical issues involved in finding an optimal framework to study deviations from General Relativity on cosmological scales, giving an overview of recent progress, with a focus on model-independent approaches to the dynamics of linear scalar perturbations. In particular I will discuss the phenomenology driven parametrization in terms of two functions of time and space, as well as the theory driven effective field theory formalism for dark energy and its implementation in CAMB.


January 12, 2015, 12:00 in P8445B
Prof. Misao Sasaki (YITP, Kyoto University)
Reviving open inflation

The scenario of open inflation once popular in the 1990's was abandoned
when the WMAP team announced in 2003 that our Universe is almost flat.
However, as the precision of observational data has increased, the possibility
to test the present curvature parameter of &Omega;<sub>K</sub> &sim; 0.01-0.001 has
become not unrealistic. I argue that open inflation can explain some of recent
cosmological data better than others, and it may be a new window to the
physics of the Universe at or even before inflation.


November 20, 2014, 16:00 in P8445A
Micah Brush (SFU)
3D cosmological observables in spherical coordinates

I will give an overview of the mathematical framework used to work with cosmological observables in spherical coordinates, as opposed to the ordinary flat sky approximation. This framework allows the cosmological growth function to be easily incorporated in to the statistics. I will then outline the construction of a promising unbiased minimum variance estimator for the growth function, though this work is still in progress.


November 6, 2014, 16:00 in P8445A
Tomas Galvez (SFU)
Bimetric models of gravity and cosmology in the early universe

In this presentation, we will briefly explore models based on the idea that there are two metrics in spacetime: One describes the standard gravity, and the other provides a geometry in which matter fields propagate. To do that, we recall the essentials of Finsler geometry and the rules to induce a metric for the propagation of matter. Such a description will cover some of the most critical features related to the field necessary to do the induction, these will arise in an attempt to build an action for this field. And finally, we provide an example to study the homogeneous limit of background FRW equations for the cosmological model with a few comments about the role of Lorentz symmetry breaking to provide a graceful exit.


October 30, 2014, 16:00 in P8445A
Yun Li (SFU)
Primordial magnetic fields

A stochastic primordial magnetic field (PMF), if present at last scattering, would source B-mode polarization of CMB. We use the recent measurements of the B-mode spectrum by POLARBEAR and BICEP2 to derive constraints on the magnitude, the spectral index and the energy scale at which PMF was generated. Additional tests, such as Faraday Rotation, can be used to distinguish the PMF sourced B-modes from those sourced by weak lensing and the inflationary gravity waves.


October 23, 2014, 16:00 in P8445A
Dr. Yuting Wang (NAOC Beijing)
Cosmological forecasts for galaxy surveys using multi-tracer techniques

TBA


October 3, 2014, 14:30 in AQ3005
Prof. Gabor Kunstatter (University of Winnipeg)
The black hole information loss problem: Is there light at the end of the tunnel? (physics colloquium)

There is substantial evidence that black holes exist in binary star systems
and at the center of most galaxies, including our own. Hawking's famous
calculation of the mid 1970's proved that black holes evaporate by emitting
radiation that does not contain any information about the state of the matter
that formed the black hole. This leads to one of the deepest conundra of
modern theoretical physics: what happens to this information once the
evaporation is complete? Is it lost forever to the outside world or does it
somehow emerge at the final stages of evaporation?

<p>
After a brief review of black holes and the evidence for their existence, I
will describe in more detail the nature of the black hole information loss
paradox. I will then list several proposed resolutions. Finally I will offer a
different, more mundane solution to the problem based on the fact that the
singularity which is thought to lurk at the center of all black holes and lies
at the heart of the conundrum cannot be realized in nature. I will use a
simple phenomenological model to argue that taming the singularity resolves
the conundrum by allowing the information to emerge at the end of the
evaporation process.


October 2, 2014, 16:00 in P8445A
Prof. Gabor Kunstatter (University of Winnipeg)
The stability of AdS spacetime in Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet gravity

Recently it has been argued that spherically symmetric AdS spacetime is
unstable against the formation of black holes for a large class of arbitrarily
small perturbations. Einstein's action undoubtedly acquires higher order
corrections at short distance scales. The simplest of these, the so-called
Gauss-Bonnet term, is second order in curvature and yields equations of motion
that are second order in derivatives of the metric. I will present results of
the numerical analysis of spherically symmetric massless scalar field collapse
in five dimensional AdS spacetime in Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet gravity. The change
in dynamics at short distances and high curvature has intriguing consequences
for black hole formation and the stability of AdS spacetime.


September 3, 2014, 16:15 in P8445A
Dr. Yin-Zhe Ma (UBC)
Searching for missing baryons

Previous studies of galaxy formation have shown that only 10 per cent of the
baryons are in compact objects, while 90 per cent of them are missing.
Numerical simulation shows that the missing baryons are in a state of diffuse
plasma with temperature 10^5 to 10^7 Kevlin, which is hard to be detected by
X-ray observations. In this talk, we present a thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich -
Lensing cross-correlation (from the Canada France Hawaii Lensing Survey
(CFHTLenS) and Planck’s thermal Sunyaev Zeldovich maps), and constrain the
diffuse baryon component with the various pressure profile. We find that the 1
and 2 halo terms detected at 3.96&sigma; and 3.67&sigma; confidence level
(CL) respectively. The effective virial temperature of the isothermal gas is
found to be in the range 7*10<sup>5</sup>--3*10<sup>8</sup> K. In addition, by
stacking the pairs of luminous red galaxies, we can place a constraint on the
temperature of the filament in between the dark matter halos.


August 15, 2014, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Dmitri Pogosyan (University of Alberta)
Topology of the Universe from Planck CMB data

Cosmic Microwave Background provides us data on the structure of our Universe
from the largest observable distances. In this talk I will discuss what limits
are placed by the recent Planck data on the possibility that our Universe has
complex  multi-connected space, and how this analysis is performed.


May 6, 2014, 16:00 in Saywell 10081
Prof. Rocky Kolb (University of Chicago)
The Quantum and the Cosmos (public lecture)

The laws of the quantum describe the behavior of elementary particles
and other phenomena in the submicroscopic world. But understanding the
largest structures in the cosmos also requires knowledge of the quantum
world. This inner space/outer space connection may hold the key to
understanding the nature of the dark matter holding together our galaxy
and the mysterious dark energy pulling apart our universe, as well as
understanding the cosmic seeds of structure that grew to produce
everything we see in the cosmos.

<BR><BR>

Edward W. Kolb, known as Rocky Kolb is a cosmologist and a professor
at the University of Chicago as well as the dean of Physical Sciences.
He has worked on many aspects of the big bang cosmology, including
baryogenesis, nucleosynthesis and dark matter. He is author, with
Michael Turner, of the popular textbook The Early Universe
(Addison-Wesley, 1990). Additionally, alongside his co-author Michael
Turner, Kolb was awarded the 2010 Dannie Heineman Prize for Astrophysics.


April 8, 2014, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Zhiqi Huang (CITA, University of Toronto)
Inflation trajectories after Planck and BICEP2

I will discuss the parameter space of various inflation models after
Planck and BICEP2. By reconstructing power spectra of primordial
curvature fluctuations and gravitational waves, I will show that the
simplest slow-roll single-field inflation models are not favored by
the data any more.


March 4, 2014, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Thomas Kephart (Vanderbilt University)
Helicity conservation and generalized Beltrami fields

We'll start with a review of magnetic helicity and the related Beltrami
equation and then provide relativistic and non-abelian generalizations.
Gauge invariance, variational principles, conserved currents, the
energy-momentum tensor and choice of boundary conditions elucidate the
subject. Applications will be discussed.


January 28, 2014, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Ivan Agullo (Louisiana State University)
Conformal anomaly and primordial magnetic fields

A long standing open question in cosmology concerns the origin of
the magnetic field observed in galaxies and galaxy clusters. The
claimed detection of a magnetic field in the intergalactic space
provides further support to the proposal of a primordial origin.
In this talk I will discuss how the well known conformal anomaly
in quantum field theory in curved space-times is able to generate
a sizable magnetic field during a phase of slow-roll inflation.
The derivation is robust from the theoretical viewpoint and
provides interesting lessons on the properties of quantum
fields during inflation.


November 19, 2013, 14:00 in P8445B
Jes Ford (UBC)
Weighing galaxy clusters with weak lensing magnification

Weak gravitational lensing is usually measured by quantifying the
distortion of galaxy shapes. However, a different and complementary
approach is to measure the magnification of distant background galaxies,
which alters their observed number densities. I will give an introduction
to lensing magnification, discuss recent progress made in this field, and
show the results of applying this technique to measure stacked profiles of
galaxy clusters in COSMOS and CFHTLenS.


November 12, 2013, 14:00 in P8445B
Jun-Qi Guo (SFU)
Spherical collapse in f(R) gravity

The spherical scalar collapse in f(R) gravity is studied numerically.
The f(R) theory is a modification of general relativity at low curvature
scale and the Ricci curvature scalar decreases when the physical scalar
field collapses to form a black hole. Consequently, the gravity transits
from general relativity to f(R) gravity, and the scalar degree of freedom
f' is released from a coupled state to a light state. Due to the gravity
from the scalar sphere and the lightness of f', f' crosses the minimum of
the potential and approaches zero near the singularity of the black hole.
Near the singularity, in the equations of motion for the metric components
and the scalar fields, the spacial derivative terms are negligible compared
to the time derivative terms; the equations of motion are decoupled,
transferring from partial differential equations to ordinary differential
equations with respect to the coordinate time. The behaviors of the metric
components and the scalar fields are described by the Kanser solutions.
These results confirm the BKL conjecture. The final state of the scalar
collapse in f(R) gravity will be discussed.


November 1, 2013, 14:30 in AQ3150
Prof. Neil Turok (Perimeter Institute)
On quantum tunnelling (physics colloquium)

One of the most basic but intriguing properties of quantum systems is their
ability to "tunnel" between configurations which are classically disconnected.
That is, processes which are  classically not just slow, but impossible,
become possible. In this talk I will outline a new, elementary approach to quantum
tunneling which emphasizes that the dominant classical trajectory is usually complex,
i.e., includes an imaginary part rather than being purely real. Through combining
the semiclassical approximation with the concepts of post-selection and weak
measurement, sharp answers can be given to questions such as "how long did the
tunneling take" and "where was the particle while it was tunneling?' Applications
of this formalism span a vast range, from experimentally testing the "reality of reality"
(!) to making sense of the inflationary multiverse and understanding the Hawking
process of black hole evaporation.


October 29, 2013, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Levon Pogosian (SFU)
Primordial magnetism in CMB polarization

A large scale B-mode signal in the CMB polarization would constitute a
smoking gun of Inflation and is the main target of several ongoing and
upcoming experiments. I will focus on distinguishing features of another
potential source of primordial B-modes -- magnetic fields. In particular,
the Faraday Rotation of CMB polarization provides a distinctive signature
of cosmic magnetic fields through the characteristic frequency dependence
and the mode-coupling correlations of the CMB variables. I will discuss
constraints on primordial magnetism that can be expected from future CMB
experiments, taking into account the obstruction caused by the magnetic
field of the Milky Way.


October 22, 2013, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Alireza Hojjati (SFU)
Cosmology with strong lensing time delays

Strong gravitational lensing of time variable sources such as quasars and
supernovae creates observable time delays between the multiple images. Time
delays can be used to measure cosmological parameters as well as probe the
dark matter (sub-)structure within the lens galaxy.

I will describe how the time delays are measured and how we can use them in
cosmology. I will also report on the observational status of strong lensing
time delay measurements.


October 8, 2013, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Yin-Zhe Ma (UBC)
Cosmic peculiar velocity field

The peculiar velocity field is one of the important probe of large scale
structure. Its prediction from linear perturbation theory of $\Lambda$CDM
should be rigorous tested against observational data. In this talk, I will
describe several statistical modeling that can utilize peculiar velocity
field data to constrain cosmology. The first method is the cosmic Mach
number, which quantify the ratio between bulk flow velocity and velocity
dispersion which can be used as a sensitive test of growth of structure.
We then constructed a hyper-parameter statistical method, to quantify the
difference between the predicted velocity field from the density field
probed by IRAS survey, and the direct measurement of galaxy velocities. We
show that the hyper-parameter combination of ENEAR, Type-Ia supernovae and
SFI++ catalogues can give a constraint on the amplitude of perturbation
f&sigma;<sub>8</sub> = 0.38 &plusmn; 0.05, which is consistent with all other different
measurements. If primordial non-Gaussianity exists on large scales, the
difference between peculiar velocity field and linear-reconstructed
density field will be differerent by a scale-dependent bias factor. We
apply the state-of-art observational data and set up a constraint on fNL
which is close to other large scale structure constraints. In addition, we
provide an explanation of previously found large amplitude of bulk flow.
We find that the bulk flow on 50 Mpc/h scales cannot provide strong
evidence against LCDM model.


October 4, 2013, 14:30 in AQ3150
Prof. Joseph Polchinski (KITP)
The black hole information paradox, alive and kicking (physics colloquium)

hought experiments have played an important role in figuring out the laws of
physics. For the unification of quantum mechanics and gravity, where the phenomena
take place in extreme regimes, they are even more crucial. Hawking’s 1976 paper
"Breakdown of Predictability in Gravitational Collapse" presented one of the great
thought experiments in the history of physics, arguing that black holes destroy
information in a way that requires a modification of the laws of quantum mechanics.
Skeptics for years failed to poke holes in Hawking's argument, but concluded that
if quantum mechanics is to be saved then our understanding of spacetime must break
down in a radical way. For a time it seemed that Maldacena's discovery of
gauge/gravity duality had resolved the issue, but recent developments have
opened many new questions.


October 1, 2013, 14:00 in P8445B
Ali Narimani (UBC)
Minimal parameterizations for modified gravity

The increasing precision of cosmological data provides us with an opportunity
to test general relativity (GR) on the largest accessible scales.
Parameterizing modified gravity models facilitates the systematic testing of
the predictions of GR, and gives a framework for detecting possible deviations
from it. Several different parameterizations have already been suggested, some
linked to classifications of theories, and others more empirically motivated.
Here we describe a particular new approach which casts modifications to
gravity through two free functions of time and scale, which are directly
linked to the field equations, but also easy to confront with observational
data. We compare our approach with other existing methods of parameterizing
modied gravity, specifically the parameterized post-Friedmann approach and the
older method using the parameter set {&mu;,&gamma;}. We explain the
connection between our parameters and the physics that is most important for
generating cosmic microwave background anisotropies. Some qualitative features
of this new parameterization, and therefore modifications to the gravitational
equations of motion, are illustrated in a toy model, where the two functions
are simply assumed to be constant parameters.


September 20, 2013, 14:30 in AQ3150
Prof. Christopher Stubbs (Harvard University)
The dark energy crisis in the longer term (physics colloquium)

The discovery of the accelerating expansion of the Universe, driven
by "Dark Energy", is an indication that our understanding of fundamental
physics is incomplete.  In particular, the Dark Energy mystery lies
at the intersection of gravity and quantum mechanics where we have trouble
knitting together a consistent theoretical picture.  In some ways our
current situation is similar to the circumstances before the advent
of quantum mechanics, with experimental results that don't fit into our
existing theoretical framework.  I will present an overview of the
Dark Energy crisis we face, review some of the work in progress, and
sketch out some scenarios that might lie in our longer term future.


September 10, 2013, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Andrei Frolov (SFU)
Intermittent non-Gaussianity

I will talk about phase transitions and entropy production at the end
of inflation in the early universe. Dynamics of preheating can convert
isocurvature modes of light fields generated during inflation into curvature
fluctuations imprinted in observable CMB temperature anisotropy. Curvature
fluctuations thus produced are typically non-Gaussian, and caustics in phase
space evolution can lead to intermittent patterns on the sky. I will discuss
their observational signatures, and our efforts to construct local
non-Gaussianity estimators to map out such signal in real data.


November 22, 2012, 13:30 in P8445B
Dr. Alireza Hojjati (Institute for the Early Universe, Ewha W. U.)
Strong lensing and time-delay measurements

Measurements of the time delays between the multiple images of gravitationally
lensed quasars at high redshifts are recognized to possess complementary
information to other probes in constraining cosmological parameters. I will
describe the basic physics of the time delay due to strong lensing and some of
the technical difficulties in its measurements. I then describe how we can do
cosmology with such information.


November 8, 2012, 15:00 in P8445A
Dr. Alireza Hojjati (Institute for the Early Universe, Ewha W. U.)
Lyman-alpha forest as a cosmological probe

Absorption of the ultra violet light (the Lyman-alpha lines) offers a 
unique probe of the neutral Hydrogen along the line of sight of quasars, 
which in turn is a way to trace dark matter distribution at high 
redshifts. After an introduction to the basics, I discuss some of the 
theoretical assumptions and approximations applied in describing the 
phenomena and how they can impact the estimation of cosmological parameters.


March 8, 2012, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Jarah Evslin (IHEP, Beijing)
Galaxy-sized monopoles as dark matter?

I describe work in progress on a proposed dark matter candidate: giant 't
Hooft-Polyakov monopoles in a new, extremely weakly coupled, dark nonabelian
gauge sector. Each galactic halo consists of a single monopole with some
charge Q.  The monopole density profile corresponds to a cored,
pseudo-isothermal halo, while Dirac quantization yields a minimum halo mass,
resolving the missing satellite problem.  A key prediction is that the outer
halo radius is Q-independent, and so dwarf spheroidal halos extend an order of
magnitude beyond the farthest stars, and generally beyond the tidal radius.
Microlensing, wide binary and bullet cluster bounds are easily satisfied.


February 23, 2012, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Jonathan Thornburg (Indiana University)
Modelling extreme mass ratio binary black hole inspirals for eLISA

Consider a stellar-mass black hole (mass &sim; 10 solar masses) in a
close orbit around a supermassive black hole (mass &sim; 10<sup>6</sup> solar
masses).  In this talk I'll discuss the challenge of trying to model
the orbital dynamics and gravitational-wave (GW) emission of such an
"EMRI" system as it evolves under the influence of the gravitational
radiation-reaction "self-force".  Because of the highly asymmetric
mass ratio the orbital-decay timescale is much longer than the orbital
period, so a direct "numerical relativity" solution of the Einstein
equations would be both impractically expensive and insufficiently
accurate.  Instead, we can use methods based on black hole perturbation
theory, treating the small black hole as a perturbation of a background
(Schwarzschild or Kerr) spacetime.  I'll outline some of the analytical
and computational challenges of these analyses, describe recent
progress in surmounting these challenges, and discuss EMRI systems
as potential GW sources for the proposed eLISA/NGO space-based GW
observatory.


February 7, 2012, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Scott Dodelson (Fermilab)
Gravitational lensing

One of the most powerful probes of dark energy is weak gravitational lensing.
After reviewing the prospects for future measurements of lensing and the
constraints expected on dark energy and modified gravity, I present our recent
results on lensing in Stripe 82 of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.


January 17, 2012, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Levon Pogosian (SFU)
Fables of reconstruction: controlling bias in the dark energy equation of state

We develop an efficient, non-parametric Bayesian method for reconstructing the
time evolution of the dark energy equation of state w(z) from observational
data. Of particular importance is the choice of prior, which must be chosen
carefully to minimise variance and bias in the reconstruction. Using a
principal component analysis, we show how a correlated prior can be used to
create a smooth reconstruction and also avoid bias in the mean behaviour of
w(z). We test our method using Wiener reconstructions based on Fisher matrix
projections, and also against more realistic MCMC analyses of simulated data
sets for Planck and a Euclid-like mission.


November 29, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Daniel Thomas (Imperial College)
Making gravity count: Cluster numbers and other cosmological observables in model independent modified gravity

Model-independent parameterisations of modified gravity have attracted
a lot of attention over the past few years and numerous combinations of
experiments and observables have been suggested to constrain the
parameters used in these models. Galaxy clusters have been mentioned,
but not looked at as extensively in the literature as some other probes.
Here we look at adding galaxy clusters into the mix of observables and
examine how they could improve the constraints on the modified gravity
parameters. We find that cluster counts significantly improve the
constraints obtained from combining Cosmic Microwave Background and weak
lensing measurements. A key part of the forecast is the use of cluster
mass functions, which are prescriptions for predicting the expected
number of clusters given the linear theory matter power spectrum. I will
examine how robust these mass function predictions are in a modified
gravity context, using the results of a suite of N-body simulations.


November 25, 2011, 14:30 in AQ3149
Prof. Levon Pogosian (SFU)
Lambda, w and beyond (physics colloquium)

Accelerating expansion of the universe is well-established, but the physics
behind it remains unknown. While the cosmological constant, Lambda, seems like
a safe bet, other theoretical proposals have not been ruled out. Fortunately,
upcoming astronomical surveys of large scale structure will dramatically
improve our ability to test Lambda, and this will be the subject of my talk.


November 22, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Jun-Qi Guo (SFU)
Scalar wave propagation in Schwarzschild metric in some usual coordinates

Analytic results show that the geodesics of Schwarzchild black hole in
Schwarzchild coordinate can not penetrate the apparent horizon. Painleve,
Eddington-Finkelstein, and Kruskal coordinates are proposed to avoid this
problem.
In this talk, under the numerical approach, scalar wave propagation in these
coordinates will exemplify the above statements. It shows that the wave indeed
can not and can penetrate the apparent horizon in Schwarzchild and Kruskal
coordinates, respectively. The situations in Painleve, Eddington-Finkelstein
coordinates will also be discussed. 
The numerical results provide a deeper understanding on the Schwarzchild
metric and the coordinate systems.


November 15, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Archisman Ghosh (University of Kentucky)
Cosmological singularities and AdS/CFT

Singularities in general relativity are expected to be cured by a quantum
theory of gravity. String theory is a prospective candidate for quantum
gravity and holographic correspondences like AdS/CFT that arise from string
theory might shed some light into the nature of singularities. These
correspondences map a theory of gravity to a dual non-gravitational field
theory in a lower number of dimensions. While the theory of gravity might
not be tractable near the singularity, the corresponding field theory might
be well-behaved. We come up with a model of cosmology where curvatures
become large at some time, thus resembling a big crunch, but whose field
theory dual remains well-behaved. Our analysis in the field theory indicates
that we have a bouncing cosmology with a thermal distribution of radiation
and a possible formation of a small black hole after the bounce.


October 21, 2011, 15:30 in AQ3149
Prof. Andrei Frolov (SFU)
Staring at the sky (physics colloquium)

Cosmic microwave background (CMB) carries to us a snapshot of the Universe
from the times when it was much younger than it is today. Small anisotropies
in CMB temperature are caused by fluctuations of gravitational potential at
recombination, which photons have to climb out of. In inflationary cosmology,
these are created by primordial quantum fluctuations of the field driving the
accelerated expansion of the Universe, and are essentially Gaussian random
noise of nearly scale-invariant spectrum. CMB anisotropy spectrum has been
mapped out to exquisite precision over the last decade. Is there anything new
we could see? In this talk, I will discuss searching for non-Gaussianity in
the CMB - the distortions and patterns hidden in the noise, and what they
could tell us about the early Univese physics.


November 1, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Andrei Frolov (SFU)
Critical collapse and solitons in classical conformal field theory

I will talk about the fate of a localized wavepacket in a classical
conformal field theory with attractive interaction
V(&phi;) = -&frac14; &lambda; &phi;&#x2074;.
As potential is unbounded from below, homogeneous field collapses to
singularity in finite time. However, finite size wavepacket can disperse
before it collapses. Competition between the two outcomes results in a
critical behavior, much like the one seen in gravitational collapse. I
calculate the critical exponents, and show that there are static regular
soliton-like solutions in the theory.


October 18, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Yin-Zhe Ma (UBC)
Cosmology on large and small cosmic scales

In this talk, I am going to test the concordance cosmology in three different
cosmic scales. (1) On the super-horizon scale, Copi et. al. (2009)
have been arguing that the lack of large angular correlations of the CMB
temperature field provides strong evidence against the standard, statistically
isotropic, LCDM cosmology. I am going to argue that the ad-hoc
discrepancy is due to the sub-optimal estimator of the low-l multipoles, and a
posteriori statistics, which exaggerates the statistical significance.
(2) LCDM model also predict the existence of primordial gravitational wave,
for which B-mode polarization will be a powerful tool to distinguish different
models of the early Universe; (3) On Galactic scales, Watkins et. al.
(2008) shows that the very large bulk flow prefers a very large density
fluctuation, which seems to contradict to the LCDM model. We provide a
physical explanation for this big bulk flow, based on the assumption that CMB
frame does not coincide with matter rest frame, resulting in the tilted
Universe. We show that the 'tilted Universe' could well explain the
bulk flow phenomena and more importantly, the constraints for this tilted
Universe can lead to the constraint on the number of e-folds of inflation; (4)
In addition, cosmic Mach Number from peculiar velocity catalog may provide a
powerful test of the growth of the structure.


October 25, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Ali Narimani (UBC)
Dimensionless cosmology

Although it is possible that some fundamental physical constants could vary in
time, it is important to only consider dimensionless combinations, such as the
fine structure constant or the equivalent coupling constant for gravity. An
additional feature of the standard model of cosmology raises an extra
complication, namely that the epoch at which we live is a crucial part of the
model. This can be defined by giving the value of any one of the evolving
cosmological parameters. It takes some care to avoid inconsistent results for
constraints on variable constants, which could be caused by effectively fixing
more than one parameter today. In this talk I will describe a dimensionless
approach to astrophysics and cosmology  through the calculations of the mass
of a star, Big Bang Neucleosynthesis, and the Cosmic Microwave Background. I
will also go through some examples in the literature that are either wrong or
incomplete due to being dimensional or overly constraining the cosmological
epoch.


September 15, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Tanmay Vachaspati (Arizona State University)
Primordial magnetic fields from the electroweak epoch

I will discuss the generation of cosmological magnetic fields at the
electroweak epoch, their evolution, and potential observational signatures.


March 18, 2011, 15:30 in B9201
Prof. Lam Hui (Columbia University)
Equivalence principle and cosmic acceleration (physics colloquium)

Recent attempts to modify gravity at long distances
to explain cosmic acceleration generally introduce new degrees
of freedom, for instance a scalar, that must be screened
in the solar system to satisfy stringent experimental constraints.
We will discuss how such screening mechanisms might lead to order
unity equivalence principle violations - in suitable environments -
namely, objects with different degrees of screening fall
at different rates. Proposals to observe such effects, or rule
out such theories, will be discussed. We will also discuss screening
mechanisms that are robust against this kind of equivalence principle
violation.


March 15, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Lam Hui (Columbia University)
Bubble collisions in the early universe

The dynamics of bubble collisions in the early universe will be
discussed. In particular, I will describe a mechanism to transition
into a new vacuum that is classical, as opposed to quantum.
The process can be understood as the collision of solitons in 1+1
dimensions. Our universe can reside in such a classically produced
bubble, as opposed to the more familiar Coleman-de-Lucia bubble.
Cosmological implications will be discussed.


March 4, 2011, 15:30 in B9201
Prof. Ed Copeland (University of Nottingham)
Models of dark energy (physics colloquium)

I briefly review models of dark energy. These include models of a
cosmological constant including those arising in string theory, and dynamical
models where a scalar field may be responsible for the observed late time
acceleration through to the possibility that we are not fully in control of
the gravity sector and the acceleration may be some manifestation of modified
gravity. All cases require some degree of fine tuning for the models to be
compatible with observation.


March 1, 2011, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Ed Copeland (University of Nottingham)
Scaling solutions in cosmology

TBA


January 14, 2011, 15:30 in AQ3154
Prof. John Mather (NASA Goddard Space Flight Center)
James Webb Space Telescope: Progress and scientific promise (physics colloquium)

The James Webb Space Telescope is the planned successor for the Hubble Space
Telescope, and will extend the reach of astronomers farther out in space and
farther back in time, to within a few hundred million years of the Big Bang.
Designed to observe at wavelengths from 0.6 to 28 &mu;m, it will open new
frontiers in science. With its huge aperture of 6.5 meters, and its optics
cooled to 40 K, it will probe the unknown with extraordinary sensitivity.  It
will be used to study beginnings: the first luminous objects to form after the
Big Bang, the first galaxies, perhaps the first black holes, and closer to
home, the formation of stars like the Sun and planets like the Earth, and even
the atmospheres of planets around other stars. I will show the design for the
telescope and explain how it will operate in deep space, a million miles from
the Earth at the Sun-Earth Lagrange point L2. The observatory is under
construction and the hardest technical problems have been solved.


December 7, 2010, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Kris Starosta (SFU)
Shell structure of nuclei and evolution of the Universe

The success of the shell model applied to atomic nuclei derives its origins
from the existence of a set of "magic" numbers corresponding to
particularly stable proton and neutron configurations in nuclei along, or
close to, the line of &beta; stability. However, for certain exotic nuclei new
magic numbers appear while the established ones disappear. The modification of
magic numbers of the nuclear shell model becomes available for direct studies
following recent progress in measurements with rare exotic beams. The impact
of nuclear structure on nucleosynthesis, distribution of elements, and
evolution of the Universe will be discussed and a research program aimed at
exploration of shell evolution away from the line of stability will be
presented.


October 19, 2010, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Adam Moss (UBC)
Precision cosmology defeats void models for acceleration

The suggestion that we occupy a privileged position near the centre of a
large, nonlinear, and nearly spherical void has recently attracted much
attention as an alternative to dark energy. Putting aside the philosophical
problems with this scenario, we perform the most complete and up-to-date
comparison with cosmological data. We use supernovae and the full cosmic
microwave background spectrum as the basis of our analysis. We also include
constraints from radial baryonic acoustic oscillations, the local Hubble rate,
age, big bang nucleosynthesis, the Compton y-distortion, and for the first
time include the local amplitude of matter fluctuations, \sigma_8. These all
paint a consistent picture in which voids are in severe tension with the data.
In particular, void models predict a very low local Hubble rate, suffer from
an "old age problem", and predict much less local structure than is observed.


November 9, 2010, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Cosimo Bambi (IPMU)
Accretion process in Kerr space-time with arbitrary value of the spin parameter

A fundamental limit for a rotating black hole is the Kerr bound |a<SUB>*</SUB>|
&le; 1, where a<SUB>*</SUB> is the spin parameter. At least in some
circumstances, we can expect that astrophysical black holes rotate close to
this limit. On the contrary, if current black hole candidates are not Kerr
black holes but, say, compact bodies made of exotic matter, the Kerr bound
does not make sense and the maximum value of |a_<SUB>*</SUB>| may be either
smaller or larger than 1. Here I discuss the effects of the spin parameter
in the accretion process onto a compact object and the observational
signatures in the case |a<SUB>*</SUB>| > 1.


September 22, 2010, 14:00 in P8445A
Prof. Wolfgang Rau (Queen's University)
Dark matter search with CDMS and SuperCDMS

Even though we know about its existence since more than
3/4 of a century, we have yet to unveil the nature of the
Dark Matter which dominates the matter content of the
Universe.
The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search Experiment (CDMS) employs
cryogenic germanium detectors to identify direct
interactions of Weakly Interacting Massive dark matter
Particles (WIMPs) with ordinary matter. These detectors
are well adapted to discriminate the abundant background
radiation from the rare nuclear recoils expected from
WIMP interactions.
After a short introduction we will discuss the latest
results from CDMS as well as plans for the next phase,
SuperCDMS, which started at the CDMS location in northern
Minnesota, but is expected to eventually move to SNOLAB,
the new Canadian underground laboratory near Sudbury, ON.


September 14, 2010, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Stephane Coutu (PennState)
Highest energy physics with the Pierre Auger Observatory

The Earth is continually bombarded by particles from the cosmos, the so-called
cosmic rays discovered almost exactly 100 years ago by Viktor Hess. Some of
these are heralds of the most energetic processes in the Universe since the
Big Bang. Because they can be excruciatingly rare, on the order of one
particle per sq. km per century, extraordinary efforts are required to detect
these messengers with good statistical accuracy. The Pierre Auger Observatory
in Argentina is the largest instrument in the world to detect the air showers
generated when these particles strike the Earth's atmosphere. Covering an area
of 3000 sq. km, utilizing a hybrid combination of surface detector stations
and nitrogen fluorescence telescopes, and in operation since 2004, Auger now
dominates the world's sample of cosmic particles at energies beyond 10^18 eV,
orders of magnitude beyond the reach of the most powerful accelerator
laboratories either in existence or conceivable in the future. From the Auger
measurements, crucial information and new puzzles emerge on the sources of
these particles, their propagation to us over cosmological distances, and
their atmospheric interactions in a realm beyond accelerator studies. The
Auger results will be presented and the state of the field will be reviewed,
as will ongoing and future developments.


February 9, 2010, 13:30 in P8445A
Jun-Qi Guo (SFU)
Dynamics of the homogeneous universe of the logarithmic f(R) model

The universe is a dynamical system. In this talk, a short introduction to the
dynamical analysis will be given. Its applications to cosmology that have been
studied in some references will be briefly discussed. Then this method will be
put on the homogeneous universe of the logarithmic f(R) model. The solutions
give an expanding universe as we expected and a contracting one as well.


January 12, 2010, 13:30 in P8445A
Prof. Levon Pogosian (SFU)
Cosmological tests of General Relativity - A look at the principals

Future weak lensing surveys will allow us to trace the evolution of galaxy
clustering and gravitational potentials through multiple epochs -- the
cosmological equivalent of tomography. This will offer an exciting opportunity
to test the validity of Einstein equations of General Relativity (GR) which
set the relations between the lensing potential, matter inhomogeneities and
curvature perturbations. We introduce two arbitrary functions of time and
scale that describe a general modification of GR in the linear regime. We then
use a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to find the eigenmodes of these
functions that surveys like DES and LSST, along with CMB and SN data, will
constrain. PCA gives a model-independent forecast of how many parameters
describing deviations from GR can be constrained, as well as the redshifts and
scales on which data is most sensitive to the departures.


December 3, 2009, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Adam Moss (UBC)
Dark energy: Violations of isotropy and homogeneity

Dark energy is one of the biggest mysteries in cosmology. In this talk
I discuss two alternatives, each with very different physical origins,
which have the unusual properties that they break fundamental cosmological
principles of isotropy and homogeneity. In the first model, I extend the
fluid approximation used to model stress-energy components in cosmology,
and treat dark energy as a stiff fluid. Such models are stable, even
when the pressure is negative, making them natural candidates to describe
the dark energy. I show how this model can be extended to the anisotropic
case, in an attempt to explain usual features in the CMB maps. In the second,
I discuss whether we can remove the need for dark energy altogether. In this
case,  we have to sacrifice the Copernican principle and live near a large,
non-linear, and close to spherical underdense region of the Universe.


December 3, 2009, 16:00 in P8445?
Dr. Neil Barnaby (CITA)
Nonlocal inflation

The inflationary paradigm has been extremely successful in accounting
for cosmological observations, however, it still lacks a firm motivation
from fundamental theory.  Attempts to embed inflation into theories of
physics beyond the standard model, such as string theory, have been
stymied by the difficulty of constructing flat scalar field potentials.
I will discuss how this difficulty can be evaded by taking advantage of
the higher derivative structure of string field theory. I will show that
these nonlocal inflation models are predictive, they generically lead to
nongaussian signatures in the CMB. At the formal level these theories
have a rich mathematical structure. After discussing the complications
that can arise when working with high derivative theories, I will describe
recent progress in understanding the initial value problem for infinite
order differential equations.


December 1, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Neil Barnaby (CITA)
Nongaussian fluctuations from particle production during inflation

In a variety of inflation models, the motion of the inflaton may
trigger the production of some iso-curvature particles during inflation,
for example via parametric resonance or a phase transition. Inflationary
particle production provides a new mechanism for generating cosmological
perturbations (infra-red cascading) and can also slow the motion of the
inflaton on a steep potential. Moreover, such models provide a novel
example of non-decoupling of high scale physics during inflation.
I will discuss the observational consequences of inflationary particle
production, including the generation of features in the primordial power
spectrum and large nongaussianities with a unique shape of bispectrum.
Finally, I will discuss various realizations of this scenario in string
theory and supersymmetry.


November 3, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Federico Urban (UBC)
The QCD nature of dark energy

The origin of the observed dark energy could be explained entirely
within the standard model, with no new fields required. I will show
how the low-energy sector of the chiral QCD Lagrangian, once embedded
in a spacetime with non-trivial topology, gives rise to a cosmological
vacuum energy density which can be can be presented entirely in terms
of QCD parameters and the Hubble constant, and whose numerical value
is astonishingly close to the observed value today. The QCD Veneziano
ghost (responsible for the solution of the axial U(1) problem) plays
a crucial role in the computation of the vacuum energy, because
the ghost's properties at very large but finite distances slightly
deviate from their infinite volume Minkowski values. After a
(detailed) review of the mechanism in a non-expanding universe
I will describe our attempts to understand the dynamics of the
ghost field in a FLRW universe, and mention several possible ways
(primarily cosmological) for this proposal to be tested.


October 20, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Alkistis Pourtsidou (University of Nottingham)
Cosmic strings with junctions

If cosmic superstrings are formed, they necessarily come in two
different types which can interact with each other and become entangled,
thus forming Y-shaped junctions. This is a novel property, not present
in the conventional cosmic string scenario, and an interesting question
is how the presence of junctions affects the dynamics of a cosmic
superstring network. We focus on the evolution and stability of cosmic
strings with junctions, and we discuss potential observational consequences.


October 8, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Niayesh Afshordi (Perimeter Institute)
Stellar black holes, and the origin of cosmic acceleration

The cosmological constant problem is arguably the deepest gap in our
understanding of modern physics. The discovery of cosmic acceleration
in the past decade and its surprising coincidence with cosmic structure
formation has added an extra layer of complexity to the problem. I will
describe how revisiting/revising some standard assumptions in the theory
of gravity can decouple the quantum vacuum from geometry, which can
potentially solve the cosmological constant problem. I will then argue
that a possible fascinating outcome of such a theory is to relate black
hole formation to cosmic acceleration, providing a possible solution to
the cosmic coincidence. A diverse range of experimental/observational
probes over the next decade will tell us whether we are close to the
end of this century-old mystery, which in turn could shed light on the
nature of quantum gravity and black holes.


September 29, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Yifu Cai (IHEP, China)
An alternative to inflation: matter bounce cosmology

In this talk, I will introduce the basic idea of matter bounce and its
specific realization by applying a Lee-Wick scalar in the early universe.
As an alternative to inflation, matter bounce can give a scale-invariant
spectrum required by CMB observations as inflation did. Moreover, it
predicts large and negative non-gaussianities which are expected to be
detected or ruled out by near future observations.


September 11, 2009, 14:30 in AQ3153
Prof. Maxim Pospelov (University of Victoria/Perimeter)
Dark forces (physics colloquium)

Physics of dark matter and dark energy, discovered via their gravitational
interaction, may hide further surprises. In my talk, I will review recent
developments with direct and indirect searches of dark matter that perhaps
give us a hint on the existence of "dark forces".The search for dark forces at
the new luminosity frontier will become an important part of modern particle
physics. I will discuss some of the recent theoretical and experimental
developments in this field.


July 21, 2009, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Daniele Steer (APC, Paris)
Multi-field DBI inflation: primordial perturbations and non-Gaussianities

In this talk I discuss some aspects of multiple-field inflation, and more
specifically so-called Dirac-Born-Infeld (DBI)  inflation. DBI inflation
emerges when one tries to embed inflation in a string-theory setting, and is
based on the motion of a brane in a higher dimensional space-time: the
directions in which the brane can move correspond to the different
inflationary fields. We discuss the (correct!) action for DBI-inflation and
then calculate some of its observational cosmological consequences,
particularly for non-gaussianities in the CMB.


May 5, 2009, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Justin Khoury (University of Pennsylvania)
Cascading gravity

TBA


March 27, 2009, 14:30 in AQ3182
Prof. Suzanne Staggs (Princeton University)
The impact of the last 13 billion years and of the first 10<SUP>-35</SUP> seconds on the CMB (physics colloquium)

Beyond its revelations to date on the structure, dynamics
and contents of the universe, the cosmic microwave background
(CMB) radiation has more physical data to be mined. We describe
two experimental approaches designed to complement the reach of
the WMAP and Planck satellites. The first is the Atacama
Cosmology Telescope (ACT) project. ACT is mapping the CMB sky
in three frequency bands (145, 215 and 265 GHz) with a resolution
5-10 times better than that of those satellites. The fine-scale
anisotropy of the CMB reflects the primordial power spectrum of
density fluctuations, but also encodes details of its interactions
with the rest of the universe in its 13-billion-year flight.
Moreover, these details depend on fundamental quantiites of
the universe including the mass of the neutrino, the equation of
state of the dark energy, and the nature of the dark matter.
The second experimental approach we describe is measurement of
the large-scale polarization anisotropy of the CMB; we will
mention both the QUI ExperimenT (QUIET) and the Atacama
B-mode Search (ABS). Gravitational waves generated during any
inflationary epoch (in the first 10 atto-attoseconds) can
give rise to a specific pattern in the tensor field of the
CMB polarization observed on the celestial sphere, dubbed
B-modes, which has no other primordial source.


January 23, 2009, 14:30 in P8445B
Prof. Fotini Markopoulou (Perimeter)
Two ways to derive a spacetime in quantum gravity

I will give a short introduction to the problem of quantum gravity
and will discuss two approaches to solving it. Both of these
approaches can be seen as problems in statistical / condensed matter
physics, where the task is to derive general relativity as the
effective theory. The first, causal dynamical triangulations, is a
new universality class of statistical systems with microscopic
causality whose properties lead to a dynamical derivation of the four
dimensions of our spacetime. The second, quantum graphity, is an
extension of the Levin-Wen string network condensation to a model of
emergent locality and matter.


March 10, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Prof. Phil Gregory (UBC)
Mining for extra-solar planets with a Bayesian MCMC Kepler periodogram

Are we on the threshold of discovering life elsewhere in the
universe? With the mounting discoveries of extra-solar planets there
is a sense that we are well underway. Astronomers searching for the
small signals induced by planets inevitably face significant
statistical challenges.  This talk illustrates how a Bayesian
re-analysis of published radial velocity data sets is providing strong
evidence for additional planetary candidates. The Bayesian nonlinear
model fitting is accomplished with a new hybrid Markov chain Monte Carlo
(HMCMC) algorithm which incorporates parallel tempering, simulated
annealing and  the genetic algorithm. Each of these components facilitate
the detection of a global minimum in &chi;<SUP>2</SUP>. By combining all
three, the HMCMC greatly increase the probability of realizing this goal
in a blind search of the parameter space. When applied to the Kepler
problem it acts as a powerful multi-planet Kepler periodogram for both
parameter estimation and model selection. The algorithm is embedded in
a unique two stage adaptive control system that automates the tuning
of the MCMC proposal distribution parameters through an annealing
operation. The HMCMC algorithm is very general and applicable to many
other nonlinear model fitting problems.


March 3, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. John Ward (University of Victoria)
Gravitational wave constraints on multi-brane inflation

The vanilla model of DBI-inflation has essentially been
ruled out by the WMAP 5 year data. The generation of large
non-Gaussianities and a detectable level of tensor perturbations are
incompatible.
In this talk I will discuss a phenomenological class of non-canonical
inflationary models that could yield both a large level of
non-Gaussian perturbations and a detectable tensor spectrum. I will
then discuss how this model can be realised in a string theory
setting.


February 24, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Prof. Adam Ritz (University of Victoria)
Probing pseudoscalar perturbations with CMB polarization

I'll discuss the use of CMB polarization as a probe of new light
pseudoscalar degrees of freedom weakly coupled to photons. The
stochastic pseudoscalar fluctuations generated during inflation
provide a mechanism for converting E-mode polarization to B-mode
during photon propagation from the surface of last scattering.
The efficiency of this conversion process is controlled by the
dimensionless ratio H/(2&pi; f<SUB>a</SUB>), where H is the Hubble
scale during inflation, and f<SUB>a</SUB><SUP>-1</SUP> is the
strength of the pseudoscalar coupling to photons. The current
observational limits on the B-mode constrain this ratio to be
less than 0.07, which in many models of inflation translates
to a sensitivity to values of f<SUB>a</SUB> in excess of
10<SUP>14</SUP> GeV, surpassing the sensitivity of other tests. 


February 20, 2009, 14:30 in AQ3182
Prof. Mark Trodden (Syracuse University)
Gravitational approaches to cosmic acceleration (physics colloquium)

Among the possible explanations for the observed acceleration of the
universe, perhaps the boldest is the idea that new gravitational
physics might be the culprit. In this colloquium I will discuss some
of the challenges of constructing a sensible phenomenological extension
of General Relativity, give examples of some candidate models of
modified gravity and survey existing observational constraints on
this approach. I will conclude by discussing how we might hope to
distinguish between modifications of General Relativity and dark energy
as competing hypotheses to explain cosmic acceleration.


February 3, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Subinoy Das (UBC)
Late forming dark matter

Similarity of energy densities of dark matter and dark
energy at the present epoch motivates us to inquire about an unified
view of these two, i.e. to ask whether the same substance can behave
as dark matter at early epoch and make a transition to dark energy at
later time. I will discuss how neutrino physics can give us such
scenario where dark matter is formed at much later time unlike weak
scale neutralino and in particular I will discuss its cosmological
signature in large scale structure formation and its possible decay to
light fermions like neutrino.


January 27, 2009, 14:00 in P8445A
Dr. Edward Chapin (UBC)
Detecting massive star-forming galaxies at z>1 using BLAST and SCUBA-2 submillimetre wavelength surveys

We currently believe that we live in a Universe whose mass
distribution is dominated by cold dark matter. This model does a
remarkable job of explaining how the mild inhomogeneities in the
primordial plasma, imprinted on the Cosmic Microwave Background,
evolved into the complex web of large-scale structures observed in the
local Universe. However, we are only just beginning to understand the
details of how smaller objects such as stars, galaxies and clusters
formed and evolved within the gravitational potential of dark matter.
A crucial step in this process is to map out the distribution of
light-emitting matter with redshift. While optical surveys using the
Hubble Space Telescope and ground-based optical telescopes in the
1990's made great progress detecting "normal" galaxies to high
redshifts (z>1), it has become clear during the last decade that
longer wavelength studies in the IR--mm regime are required to detect
galaxies in their earliest stages, as they are often optically
obscured by dust, and hence absent from even the deepest optical
images. I will discuss some recent Balloon-borne Large Aperture
Submillimeter Telescope (BLAST) results from our 2006 campaign from
McMurdo, Antarctica. I will also cover future surveys with the SPIRE
camera for the Herschel Satellite, and the SCUBA-2 camera that will
operate on the 15-m James Clerk Maxwell Telescope in Hawaii.


November 14, 2008, 14:30 in AQ3181
Prof. Robert Brandenberger (McGill University)
String theory and the very early universe (physics colloquium)

The inflationary universe scenario is the current paradigm of early
universe cosmology. However, current realizations of inflation suffer
from some serious conceptual problems. Superstring theory provides the
framework for developing a new theory of the very early universe. I will
discuss a new cosmological model ("string gas cosmology") which is based
on a number of key ingredients of superstring theory. According to this
model, the universe began not with a phase of inflation, but as a hot
string soup, and the cosmological inhomogeneities we can measure today
were seeded by thermal fluctuations of this gas of strings.


October 2, 2008, 14:00 in IRMACS
Prof. Andrei Frolov (SFU)
A singularity problem with f(R) dark energy

I will talk about a curvature singularity problem appearing on
non-linear level that generally plagues f(R) models that modify Einstein
gravity in the infrared. It is caused by the fact that for the effective
scalar degree of freedom, the curvature singularity is at a finite field
value and energy level, and can be easily accessed by the field dynamics
in the presence of matter. Consequences for observational viability are
grave: regular static solutions for neutron stars do not exist in many
IR-modified f(R) models. I will discuss whether the theory can be saved
by an UV-completion.


September 25, 2008, 14:00 in IRMACS
Prof. Dmitri Korotkin (Concordia University)
Canonical quantization of Einstein-Rosen gravitational waves with two polarizations

We shall discuss the canonical quantization of the essentially nonlinear
midisuperspace model describing cylindrically symmetric gravitational
waves with two polarizations.  This model is a sufficiently complicated
toy model of quantum gravity. Our approach provides a non-linear
generalization of the quantization of the collinearly polarized
Einstein-Rosen gravitational waves. The main technical tool we use is the
theory of quantum integrable systems and quantum groups.


August 14, 2008, 11:00 in SSB7109
Dr. Prashanth Jaikumar (Institute of Mathematical Sciences, CIT, India)
Astrophysics of dense quark matter

I will discuss the nature and possible consequences of phases of dense
quark matter in neutron stars. After a brief summary of recent theoretical
advances in this field, I will emphasize connections to observations of
neutrino cooling, r-mode instabilities (gravitational waves) and
heavy-element nucleosynthesis.


May 13, 2008, 11:00 in P8445B
Dr. Mark Wyman (Perimeter Institute)
N-body Degravitation

A possible resolution to the cosmological constant problem may
come from the graviton having a small mass or width. In this picture, the
graviton carries extra polarizarions. Its helicity-0 or scalar mode is
suppressed in regions of high density but becomes important on
cosmological distance scales. We are solving the equations for this scalar
component numerically as a part of an N-body simulation. This will allow
us to quantify the impact of massive/resonance gravity on the formation of
large scale structure for the first time.


April 1, 2008, 12:30 in IRMACS
Dr. James Zibin (UBC)
Restraining void models for cosmological acceleration

The last decade has seen the compilation of strong evidence that
the expansion of the Universe is currently accelerating.  The source
for this acceleration is still a mystery, although probably the
simplest view is that it is caused by a cosmological constant.  One
alternative explanation which requires no new matter fields or
modifications of gravity, but discards the Copernican Principle,
involves a large nonlinear underdensity centred near us.  It is known
that such a void can mimic some of the data by replacing increasing
expasion rate in time with increasing expansion rate towards the void
centre.  I discuss the difficulties that void models face, from the
philosophical to the observational.  I also lay out a general
relativistic framework for the evolution of linear perturbations on a
spherical void background aimed at confronting with data.


March 28, 2008, 14:30 in AQ3181
Prof. Alexander Vilenkin (Tufts University)
Many worlds in one (physics colloquium)

Recent developments in cosmology suggest that the big bang was not a
unique event in the cosmic history. Other bangs constantly erupt in
remote parts of the universe, producing new worlds with great variety
of physical properties. I will discuss the origin of this new worldview
and its possible observational tests.


February 22, 2008, 14:30 in AQ3181
Prof. Andrei Frolov (SFU)
Simulating the Big Bang (physics colloquium)

The idea of inflation (a period of rapid quasi-exponential expansion
of the Universe) neatly solves several issues in cosmology. But while
the Universe is inflating, its contents is cold. Eventually, inflation
has to end and the field driving the inflation has to decay, depositing
its energy into high-energy particles. This process, known as reheating,
starts the hot big bang as we know it. I will discuss basic models of
resonant and tachyonic preheating, show recent numerical simulations
of the inflaton decay (which turns out to be quite non-linear and violent),
and explore how gravitational waves are produced in the process. If observed,
they could allow a glimpse of physics at energies we know very little about.


February 7, 2008, 10:30 in IRMACS
Prof. Scott Dodelson (Fermilab)
Dark matter vs. modified gravity

TBA


February 7, 2008, 13:30 in SSB7172
Prof. Scott Dodelson (Fermilab)
Fundamental physics from space (special colloquium)

The Standard Model of particle physics has been remarkably
successful in explaining a wide variety of microscopic phenomena. This
success is almost too good: we are searching for any hints of physics
beyond the Standard Model. Over the last decade, evidence for new
physics has come from an unlikely source: astrophysical
observations. I describe some of these observations and explain how they
are changing our view of the laws and constituents of the Universe.


February 5, 2008, 12:30 in IRMACS
Dr. Aaron Berndsen (SFU)
Long-lived relics in warped reheating

The success of the inflationary paradigm has prompted numerous efforts
seeking to realize inflation within the context of string theory.
Warped inflation has, arguably, received the plupart of attention, and
it results in several unique features. The reheating scenario is one
of those features, resulting from a sequence of intermediary steps as
opposed to a direct coupling between the inflaton and standard model
particles. This talk will (briefly) review this unique framework for
inflation and the process of reheating in brane inflation. The focus
will be on the possibility of long-lived relics, and a means of
accommodating their decay. The results are intriguing, and I will end
the talk by breaking supersymmetry, and placing new constraints on the
parameters of these constructions.


January 22, 2008, 12:30 in IRMACS
Dr. Richard Battye (University of Manchester)
Constraints on inflation models which predict cosmic strings

Most of the "best motivated" models of inflation predict the formation of a
network of cosmic strings. This network can lead to a sub-dominant, but
important contribution to the observed microwave anisotropies. We will discuss
two models which fall into this category, SUSY hybrid inflation and brane
inflation, and the constraints imposed on these models by the recent 3-year
results from WMAP.


January 31, 2008, 13:00 in AQ4150
Prof. Saurya Das (University of Lethbridge)
Black holes and the problem of information loss (CAP Lecture)

Starting from two fundamental principles of physics, namely the maximum
speed of propagation of signals (speed of light) and reference frame
independence of this speed, we arrive at the notion of spacetime continuum
and the metric. When we try to incorporate acceleration or gravity in this
picture, we show that spacetime must be curved. The amount of curvature
depends on the matter content of the spacetime, and is governed by the
Einstein equations. These equations also predict the existence of black
holes - highly dense gravitating objects, from which (classically) nothing
can escape, not even light. When quantum mechanics is taken into consideration,
black holes are predicted to emit small amounts of thermal radiation and
have large amounts of entropy. This also gives rise to the so-called
'information loss problem', which says that information entering a
black hole maybe lost forever, in apparent violation of quantum mechanics.
We explore possible microscopic origins of black hole entropy and
possible resolutions of the information loss problem.

<BR><BR>
<FONT SIZE="-1"><I>
This talk is a part of the <A HREF="https://www.cap.ca/edu/lect.html">CAP Lecture Tour</A> series,
and should be accessible to a wide audience of non-specialists.
Undergraduate students are encouraged to attend. 
</I></FONT>


January 15, 2008, 12:30 in IRMACS
Mustafa Amin (Stanford/KIPAC)
A framework for probing gravity and dark energy on cosmological scales

Departures from the flat-LCDM model can occur in the geometry, expansion
history and the growth of structure. In addition, the relationship between
the non-relativistic matter distribution and metric perturbations depends
on the theory of gravity and any additional fields that are present. This
provides another means of distinguishing the alternatives to LCDM. I will
briefly discuss kinematic constraints on the expansion history. I will
then concentrate on our attempt to develop a framework for probing
the matter-metric relationship on linear, sub-horizon scales in a
scale-dependent manner.


January 24, 2008, 13:30 in SSB7172
Prof. John Moffat (University of Toronto/Perimeter)
Modified gravity and its consequences for astronomy, astrophysics and cosmology

The consequences of a modified gravity (MOG) are explored. The
theory successfully explains the dispersion velocities of globular
clusters, the rotation curves of galaxies, the mass profiles of x-ray
clusters, the Bullet Cluster and cosmological observations without exotic
dark matter. An explanation of the accelerated expansion of the universe is
obtained from the MOG field equations without Einstein's cosmological
constant. I demonstrate how the solutions of the field equations can be
derived directly from the action principle of the theory, without resorting
to ad-hoc parameter choices of empirical formulae. After the values of
integration constants are determined from observation, approximate
solutions to the field equations of MOG are obtained that show excellent
agreement with the data from the scale of the solar system to cosmological
scales. With no undetermined free parameters, the theory can be used to
make firm predictions that may be verifiable in the foreseeable future.


November 13, 2007, 14:30 in SSB7172
Dr. Gong-Bo Zhao (SFU)
Dark energy perturbation and its application on cosmology

Dark Energy (DE) is amongst the biggest enigma in modern cosmology. The
nature of dark energy dominates the fate of our universe and the
perturbation of DE plays a crucial role in theoretical study as well as in
the determination of cosmological parameters. 
The latest astronomical observations, including supernova type Ia (SN Ia),
cosmic microwave background (CMB) and large scale structure (LSS), mildly
favor the equation of state w of DE crossing over the cosmological boundary
during evolution. However, there exists divergence in perturbation equation
when w crosses over -1, which gives rise to the classical difficulty in
global fit of cosmological parameters. In this talk, I will firstly study
the dark energy perturbation in theory and propose a strategy to handle the
perturbation in parameter fitting based on Quintom model. Then I will
investigate the correlations of dynamical dark energy with inflation
parameters, neutrino mass and curvature of space-time. 
The nature of neutrino is another challenge to modern physics. The mass of
neutrino, which is beyond the standard model of particle physics, is of
great significance theoretically. With the latest astronomical data, I will
study the correlation between neutrino mass and inflationary parameters and
the cosmological constraints of mass varying neutrinos. I will show that the
neutrino mass limit can be relaxed dramatically if neutrino mass varies and
mass varying neutrinos are favored at about 3 sigma for some data
combination. This discovery challenges the fundamental particle physics and
cosmology to a great extent.


October 30, 2007, 14:30 in SSB7172
Alessandra Silvestri (Syracuse University)
Scale-dependent growth of structure in viable f(R) theories

f(R) theories are an alternative approach at the phenomenon of cosmic
acceleration, in which the Einstein-Hilbert action for gravity is modified
by adding a function of the Ricci scalar, f(R). While at the background
level viable f(R) models must closely mimic LCDM, the difference in their
prediction for the growth of large scale structures can be sufficiently
large to leave detectable signatures in future surveys. In this talk,
after reviewing the conditions for the background viability of f(R)
theories, I will focus on scalar perturbations. I will present in some
details the dynamics of linear perturbations, showing what are the
characteristic imprints of f(R) models in the large scale structure.


October 5, 2007, 14:30 in K9500
Prof. Douglas Scott (UBC)
The Standard Cosmological Model (physics colloquium)

All empirical evidence relating to our Universe is currently well
explained through a fairly simple model, composed of only a few key
ingredients. The background is described by homogeneous and isotropic
solutions within General Relativity, in which there is domination by
vacuum energy and cold dark matter in a flat expanding geometry. On top
of this background are fluctuations in density which were laid down at
early times and are nearly scale-invariant, adiabatic and Gaussian.
From these low amplitude seeds all of today's structure grew through
gravitational instability. Within this "Standard Model" the Universe in
which we live is described by fewer than 10 numbers, most of which are
now known to at least the first digit. So what is left to do? How well
should we determine the cosmological parameters? Where did these values
come from? Are there more numbers that we haven't thought of yet? Is
this Cosmological Standard Model anything like the Standard Model of
Particle Physics?


November 29, 2007, 14:30 in IRMACS
Prof. Henk Hoekstra (University of Victoria)
Weak lensing by large scale structure

Intervening structures in the universe give rise to small distortions
in the shapes of distant galaxies. By measuring this tiny coherent
signal, we can study the mass distribution in the universe directly,
without relying on baryonic tracers. This makes weak lensing by
large-scale structures a powerful probe of cosmology. I will review
the topic of "cosmic shear" and discuss how the signal is extracted
from the data. I will present results from recent surveys, most
notably the CFHT Legacy Survey. Finally I will discuss what will be
required to significantly improve constraints on the properties of
dark energy.


October 23, 2007, 14:30 in SSB7172
Dr. Wan-Il Park (KAIST)
A scenario of baryogenesis compatible with thermal inflation, and preheating

Most of models of baryogenesis are incompatible with thermal inflation
which is the most compelling solution of cosmological moduli problem. We
propose a simple model in which the MSSM plus neutrino mass term (LHu)^2
is supplemented by a minimal flaton sector to drive the thermal
inflation. Under two very plausible assumptions, this model leads to
thermal inflation followed by Affleck-Dine type leptogenesis along the
LHu flat direction. The conservation of generated asymmetry in this
model is non-trivial since Hubble parameter is negligible at the time of
our Affleck-Dine leptogenesis. We demonstrate numerically that
preheating does efficiently damp the amplitude of the Affleck-Dine field
and that the lepton number is conserved as the result. 


May 3, 2007, 13:00 in P8445B
Prof. Tanmay Vachaspati (Case Western Reserve University)
Formation of black holes 

I discuss the formation of black holes by spherical domain wall collapse
as seen by an asymptotic observer, using the functional Schrodinger
formalism. To explore what signals such observers will see, I describe
the radiation of a scalar quantum field in the collapsing domain wall
background. The total energy flux radiated diverges when backreaction of
the radiation on the collapsing wall is ignored, and the domain wall is
seen by the asymptotic observer to evaporate by non-thermal radiation
during the collapse process. Evaporation by pre-Hawking radiation opens
the possibility that an asymptotic observer can never lose objects down
a black hole. Together with the non-thermal nature of pre-Hawking
radiation, this may resolve the black hole information loss problem.


Apr 24, 2007, 14:00 in P8445B
Dr. Evgeny Sorkin (UBC)
The pinching black strings

I discuss the black holes with various horizon topologies, that exist
in the spacetimes with extra compactified dimensions, and the phase
transitions between them. In this talk I particularize to the
spacetime with a single compact dimension. The relevant black objects
are the black string, whose horizon wraps the extra-dimensions, and
the localized black hole. The uniform string becomes  unstable if 'too
thin', and decays into a nonuniform state which apparently evolves
until it pinches off and a localized black hole is formed. Currently,
the dynamical evolution remains elusive, thus we are set to construct
the phase diagram of the static solutions. In particular, the
extremely non-uniform black strings are numerically constructed, and
the local geometry near the pinch off is explored.


Mar 27, 2007, 14:00 in SSB7109
Prof. Shinji Mukohyama (University of Tokyo)
Cosmology with warped flux compactification

Inflation in the early universe and the accelerated expansion of the
late-time universe are two major quasi de Sitter phases in the history
of our universe. Thus, any candidates for the unified theory of nature
must allow 4-dimensional de Sitter or/and quasi de Sitter solutions.
It is only recent that a consistent 4-dimensional de Sitter solution
was found in string theory by using warped flux compactification and
branes. In this talk I would like to discuss cosmological applications
of models of warped flux compactification.


Apr 19, 2007, 13:00 in P8445B
Dr. Eric Peng (HIA/DAO, Victoria)
Globular cluster systems and the early evolution of galaxies

Globular clusters are among the oldest stellar populations in the
local Universe, thus providing a unique window onto the earliest
epochs of galaxy formation. As markers of the most intense periods of
star formation, these old, massive star clusters are intricately
entwined with the formation of the galaxies that host them. Some of
their properties, but not all, mirror those of their host galaxies,
and it is from both the similarities and differences that we can gain
insight on galaxy evolution. I will present a view of globular
cluster systems in 100 early-type galaxies from the ACS Virgo Cluster
Survey, the most comprehensive and homogeneous data set of its type
to date. I will describe some of the main results of the survey,
including the metallicities and specific frequencies of our surveyed
globular cluster systems, and discuss their implications for early
galaxy formation.


Apr 12, 2007, 13:00 in P8445B
Dr. David Rapetti (KIPAC/Stanford)
X-ray galaxy clusters as cosmological probes

Late-time cosmic acceleration is currently one of the most
intriguing questions in cosmology. The standard
cosmological model now consists of a present-day Universe filled with
approximately 4 per cent of normal baryonic matter, 23 per cent of
cold dark matter (CDM) and 73 per cent of quantum vacuum energy (the
cosmological constant, &Lambda;) that provides the late-time cosmic
acceleration. However, any departure from this standard &Lambda;CDM
model would suggest either a new energy component of the
Universe, so-called dark energy, or a modified gravity theory,
so-called dark gravity. Using X-ray galaxy clusters we have
developed two independent and complementary experiments to constrain
cosmic acceleration. Our first experiment measures distances to the
largest and most relaxed X-ray galaxy clusters using their gas mass
fraction f<SUB>gas</SUB>. This allows us to reconstruct cosmic expansion
up to z ~ 1. This experiment also provides one of the most
precise measurements of the mean matter density of the Universe.
Combining this experiment with supernovae type Ia and cosmic
microwave background data we obtain tight constraints on departures
around the concordance &Lambda;CDM paradigm. Furthermore we use two
different and complementary theoretical frameworks to explore
departures from &Lambda;CDM. We find that &Lambda;CDM is still a
robust description of current data at about the 1&sigma; level. Our
second experiment measures the growth of structure which is a strong
function of cosmological parameters. We count X-ray galaxy clusters
above both a flux and a luminosity threshold at different redshifts
(z &lt; 0.7) and compare this with precise theoretical predictions of the
mass function. We obtain the tightest constraints to date for a single
experiment on the equation of state of dark energy.


Apr 3, 2007, 14:00 in SSB7109
Prof. Christian Armendariz-Picon (Syracuse)
Do quantum excitations of the inflaton decay?

The properties of the primordial perturbations seeded during a stage of
inflation are determined by the quantum state of the inflaton.  This state is
usually assumed to be the "vacuum", since one expects excited states to decay
into the state of lowest energy. In the talk I discuss whether this assumption
holds in the presence of a short-distance cut-off. I describe the calculation of
transition probabilities between excited states and the vacuum, and discuss the
implications of the results that I obtain.


March 8, 2007, 13:00 in P8445B
Dr. Catherine Heymans (UBC)
Probing dark matter and dark energy with weak gravitational lensing

Cosmology is the scientific study of the Universe, striving to answer the most
fundamental questions about its origin, history and future.  Already we know
that only a small fraction of our Universe is made up of the material that we
are familiar with on Earth.  The rest is made up of an unknown Dark Matter
component that surrounds all galaxies, and an unknown Dark Energy component that
is responsible for the accelerating expansion of the Universe.  Measuring the
exact quantities of each of our Universe's components is the great achievement
of modern day Cosmology, revealing a rather sad fate for the Universe; it will
simply expand forever becoming colder and emptier.  That we have no grasp of the
nature and origin of dark matter or dark energy however remains rather
unsatisfactory!

<BR><BR>
In this talk I will describe a new technique, called `weak gravitational
lensing', that can not only detect dark matter but also has the great promise of
being able to measure the properties of dark energy.  I will discuss the physics
that underpins this method and present maps of the distribution of dark matter
across an area of sky the size of the full moon. I will also describe an
exciting future NASA mission that will utilize this lensing technique to uncover
the origin of the mysterious dark energy.


Nov 23, 2006, 14:00 in P8445B
Veselin Filev (University of Southern California)
Adding flavors in AdS/CFT correspondence
Guest string theory seminar hosted by the cosmology group


Mar 22, 2007, 13:00 in P8445B
Prof. Ira Wasserman (Cornell)
The neutron star in 1930 -- and today (special colloquium)

The neutron had not yet been discovered in 1930, but it might have been.
To understand neutron stars simply it is fun to ask how much could have
been predicted about their properties if it had. After using this
fictional device to introduce neutron stars, we will fast forward to
today, where some of the issues remain the same as we could have deduced
in 1930, but others are more subtle -- and potentially revealing about
high density nuclear physics.


Mar 23, 2007, 12:30 pm in P8445B
Prof. Ira Wasserman (Cornell)
Dynamics of the r mode instability of neutron stars

One of the most important questions in high energy astrophysics is what
sets the fastest possible rotational frequencies of neutron stars.
Although requiring stability against rotational mass shedding set
absolute upper bounds, for most equations of state these seem to be well
above the fastest observed rotational frequencies. The r-mode -- a
Rossby wave in a rotating fluid -- is destabilized via the emission of
gravitational radiation in neutron stars at rotation rates below the
absolute upper bounds. This talk will treat the important topic of how
the instability saturates, which determines whether gravitational
radiation is detectable from neutron stars suffering from this
instability. Moreover, the question of whether the instability is ``too
strong'' will also be discussed -- and what that might mean for neutron
star physics.


1 February 2007, 13:00 in P8445B
Dr. Adam Moss (UBC)
Dark energy and the rubber band

There is now strong evidence for an unknown form of dark energy
pervading the universe. However, the microphysical explanation of this
dark energy remains a mystery. The dark energy cannot be a normal fluid,
as this leads to instabilities on the smallest scales. In this talk I
discuss the possibility that the dark energy takes the form of an elastic
medium. I explain the theoretical framework and cosmological signatures
of such a model, and also discuss the possibility that the microphysical
origin is a tangled network of cosmic strings and domain walls.


16 January 2007, 14:00 in SSB7109
Dr. Bojan Losic (University of Alberta)
Aspects of nonlinear perturbation theory in cosmology

I will review recent suggestions that nonlinear cosmological
perturbations are important in slow-roll inflation models. Closely
related issues in pure de Sitter spacetime will also be discussed,
with the upshot that a reasonable notion of perturbative consistency
directly implies a disturbing absence of nontrivial dynamics in de
Sitter spacetime. The scope of the talk will be introductory.


11 January 2007, 13:00 in P8445B
Prof. Krzysztof Sliwa (Tufts University)
Supersymmetry for particle physicists

The idea of Supersymmetry, together with the theoretical motivations for
its introduction, is presented in a way that puts an emphasis on the
main concepts rather than the technical details. The observational
consequences of Supersymmetry, past searches, existing limits and
prospects for possible observation of Supersymmetric particles in
experiments at Large Hadron Collider at CERN are summarized.


5 December 2006, 13:00 in P8445B
Prof. Jasper Wall (UBC)
Submillimetre galaxies and star-formation in the early Universe

Submm galaxies recently have been discovered in significant numbers
using SCUBA, the sub-millimetre common-user bolometer array on the James
Clerk Maxwell Telescope, Hawaii. Their spectra closely resemble 30-40K
black-body; they are believed to be dust-shrouded progenitor galaxies
with the dust heated by UV radiation from early generations of stars. If
this is so, then star-forming rates in each pre-galaxy must be
prodigious, say 1000 solar masses per year. The present day equivalents
are suggested to be the so-called ULIRGs, ultra-luminous IR galaxies,
such as NGC 6240 or Arp 220, whose enormous star-formation rates are
attributed to major galaxy mergers. At last we have a completely
identified sample of 35 submm galaxies, and my talk will describe how
this sample - despite its small size - has enabled us to learn much
about the cosmic space distribution and evolution of this key population
of proto-galaxies.


30 November 2006, 14:00 in P8445B
Prof. Marco Peloso (University of Minnesota)
The role of SUSY flat directions in reheating

Reheating after inflation describes all the particle physics processes
occurring from the decay of the inflaton up to the establishment of
thermal equilibrium. Due to the strong model dependence, it is one of
the most unknown stages in the history of the universe. There is ongoing
effort to determine the reheating temperature within different scenarios
(from this quantity, one can then determine the amount of baryons and of
unwanted relics, such as gravitinos, produced by the thermal bath). It
has been argued that SUSY flat directions are naturally excited during
inflation, and that they slow down thermalization, by providing a large
effective mass to the fields they are coupled to. We discuss a
nonperturbative decay channel for the flat directions which has been
generally overlooked in the literature. It typically leads to a quick
decay of the flat directions, and, arguably, to a suppression of their
delaying effect for thermalization.


22 November 2006, 12:45 in P8445B
Prof. Ingrid Stairs (UBC)
Relativistic binary pulsars

Radio pulsars in double-neutron-star systems provide the best tests of
strong-field gravitational theories. I will present recent observations
of PSR B1534+12 and the double-pulsar system J0737-3039A/B. In both
cases, the pulsar timing observations are sensitive to multiple
relativistic corrections to the basic Keplerian orbit, and therefore
yield multiple tests of general relativity, with the double pulsar
providing the strongest test to date. I will also discuss observations
of geodetic precession and implications for the formation of the two
systems.


4 October 2006, 12:45 in P8445A
Dr. Serge Winitzki (Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich)
Predictions in eternally inflating universe

In generic models of cosmological inflation, quantum fluctuations
strongly influence the spacetime metric and produce infinitely many
regions where the end of inflation (reheating) is delayed until
arbitrarily late times. The geometry of the resulting spacetime is
highly inhomogeneous on scales of many Hubble sizes. The recently
developed string-theoretic picture of the "landscape" presents a similar
structure, where an infinite number of de Sitter and anti-de Sitter
universes are nucleated via gravitational quantum tunneling. Since
observers on the Earth have no information about their position within
the eternally inflating landscape, the main question in this context is
to obtain statistical predictions for quantities observed at a random
location within the landscape. I describe the problems arising within
this statistical framework, in particular, the need for a volume cut-off
and the dependence of certain cut-off schemes on time slicing and on the
initial conditions. I review the existing proposals for extracting
predictions and give examples of their applications, in particular, to
the cosmological constant problem.
